None of the eight chloramphenicol resistant isolates, including those that were negative for catA1 and cmlA, were positive for floR. Majority of the tetracycline resistant isolates did not give positive amplification signals for most of the tetracycline resistant genes we tested for.

Even though all positive controls gave positive amplification signals,  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{C}) $ ,  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{D}) $ ,  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{E}) $ ,  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{G}) $  or  $ \operatorname{tet}(39) $  could not be detected among the 29 tetracycline resistant isolates. However,  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{A}) $  and  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{B}) $  were found in six (21%) and five (17%) isolates respectively. Compared to the present study, other studies reported higher frequencies of  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{A}) $  and  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{B}) $ . For example, in a study of 317 E. coli isolated from pigs, cattle and poultry in Germany, Guerra et al. $ ^{[15]} $  found  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{A}) $  and  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{B}) $  in 66% and 42% of the isolates respectively. Similarly, Enne et al. $ ^{[26]} $  found 56% of 103 tetracycline resistant E. coli from farm animals at slaughter to contain  $ \operatorname{tet}(\mathrm{B}) $ .  $ \operatorname{acc}(3) $ -IV, the only gentamicin resistance gene tested for in this study was not detected in any of the four gentamicin resistant isolates.

Seven out of eight isolates that were resistant to ciprofloxacin and had MIC values to nalidixic acid of  $ \leq32 $  mg/L contained qnrS. Of these isolates, the PCR products of three isolates (EC54, EC143, EC199) were sequenced and the sequences showed 100% identity to qnrS1 from E. coli (GenBank accession number GQ214053).

## Discussion

Development of resistance to antimicrobial agents is a problem of global proportion which is increasingly frustrating efforts to treat infectious diseases. This has been attributed to human and agricultural use of antimicrobials. Thus, our study investigated the occurrence and molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance among commensal  $ E.\ coli $  isolated from selected poultry farms in southwestern Nigeria, an area of the world where little is known on antibiotic use and its contribution to the development and dissemination of resistance. A serious limitation to this study was the difficulty encountered in sample collection which limited the number of isolates included in the study. It was difficult convincing farm owners to participate in the study and most of the volunteer farms restricted access to specified areas of the farms, and none allowed sample collection more than twice. Nonetheless, our findings demonstrated that the commensal  $ E.\ coli $  included in this study were commonly resistant to antibiotics used in human and veterinary medicine. However, because our study did not include isolates from farms without antimicrobial use, it was difficult to draw a definite conclusion on the association between drug use on the study farms and the occurrence of resistance in the isolates.



The observed levels of resistance to ciprofloxacin (42%) and trimethoprim (47%) were however unexpected since only one of the eight farms admitted using the fluoroquinolone enrofloxacin and no farm used trimethoprim. Thus, it is quite possible that use of trimethoprim, a common component of poultry premixes used widely in the farms of the present study was underreported. More importantly, our observation about the levels of resistance to ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim suggested that factors other than antibiotic use may be contributing to the selection of resistance among the present isolates.

Similar to the observed pattern of phenotypic resistance, genes conferring resistance to streptomycin/spectinomycin, sulphamethoxazole and ampicillin were also found to be common among the isolates. However, it seemed that local and geographical factors played a role in the occurrence of some resistance genes; all isolates positive for sul3 and tetracycline resistance genes are from Ogbomoso. In a sharp contrast to this, other genes seem to have a widespread occurrence within the study farms. For example, isolates with qnrS originated from six different farms (including the farm admitting usage of fluoroquinolones) and from four different sources: poultry droppings, fish pond sediment and farm soil. The only isolate that did not contain any of the quinolone resistance genes screened for was from well water (EC142). The widespread occurrence of qnrS observed in this study may be a result of their co-selection and transfer with other resistance determinants on mobile genetic elements. qnr, a plasmid-mediated horizontally transferable gene encoding quinolone resistance was discovered for the first time in 1998 and has been in circulation for at least 20 years  $ [27] $ . Qnr proteins are capable of protecting DNA gyrase from the action of quinolones and qnr are increasingly detected in isolates of clinical importance  $ [28] $ . Our findings indicated that qnrS was widely spread among poultry and their production environment in Nigeria. qnrS1 was recently found among Salmonella and E. coli from humans and animal sources in Nigeria  $ [29,13] $ .

Our study provided additional evidence that food animals production environments may be important reservoirs of clinically important antibiotic resistance genes such as plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) genes in this part of the world. This is of