TABLE 4 Association between isolation of antimicrobial-resistant E. coli and resistance-transducing phages from the same chicken meat sample



<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">No. of samples positive for:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Antimicrobial resistance $ ^{a} $</td><td>E. coli</td><td>Transducing phage</td><td>Both</td><td>P</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $</td><td>44</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>1.0000</td></tr><tr><td>Cm $ ^{r} $</td><td>18</td><td>9</td><td>1</td><td>0.1304</td></tr><tr><td>Km $ ^{r} $</td><td>22</td><td>17</td><td>12</td><td>0.0148 $ ^{b} $</td></tr><tr><td>Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>40</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>0.4959</td></tr></table>

 $ ^{a} $  Amp $ ^{r} $ , Cm $ ^{r} $ , Km $ ^{r} $ , and Tet $ ^{r} $ , ampicillin, chloramphenicol, kanamycin, and tetracycline resistant, respectively.

 $ ^{b} $  Statistically significant relation between isolation of antimicrobial-resistant E. coli and resistance-transducing phages.

## DISCUSSION

Although transduction of the antibiotic resistance island in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT104 has been effectively shown  $ (28) $ , until very recently, transduction via bacteriophages was assumed to play a minor part in the horizontal transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes  $ (12, 15) $ . Food of animal origin is a well-known vehicle allowing the transfer of bacteria from food-producing animals to humans, as reflected by the increasing incidence of foodborne zoonotic diseases in humans and the rising numbers of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria found on food of animal origin. Such food thus represents a possible source of antimicrobial resistance in the human environment and is included in many antimicrobial screening programs. The increasing numbers of resistant bacteria, both commensals and foodborne pathogens, on food are a cause of concern to public health authorities, veterinarians, and physicians. Strategies to combat antimicrobial resistance have enjoyed only limited success, and there are still many questions relating to how and when resistance transfer occurs. The presence of phages that transfer antimicrobial resistance could explain the failures to combat antimicrobial resistance described above. We now show, based on mathematical modeling, that chicken meat can carry a considerable number of phages capable of transferring antimicrobial resistance and that certain antimicrobial resistance genes may be transferred primarily by phages. We tested randomly selected coliphages from chicken meat samples for their ability to transduce resistance to tetracycline (an antimicrobial widely used in veterinary medicine, in aquaculture, and on plants and thus extensively released into the environment, although its photodegradation is fairly rapid), ampicillin (a  $ \beta $ -lactam antibiotic and, thus, a compound typical of a range of compounds that are important in veterinary and human medicine and that have a very short half-life in the environment), chloramphenicol (which is banned in veterinary medicine but which is still found in the environment), and kanamycin (an aminoglycoside which is commonly used as a second-choice antibiotic in human medicine and which can be found in aquatic environments because of its long degradation time)  $ (29, 30) $ . About a quarter of the randomly selected phages were able to transduce resistance to one or more of these antimicrobials to E. coli ATCC 13706. Thus, the actual number of phages found on chicken meat able to transduce antibiotic resistance genes must be much higher, as we tested for resistance to only five different antibiotics and randomly chose only five phages per sample (from a plate with 10 to 300 plaques). Accordingly, our results confirm speculations that transduction may have a role in the exchange of antimicrobial resistance between microorganisms and, thus, between environments  $ (17, 31–34) $ . Chicken meat has been reported to harbor a high number of resistant E. coli isolates  $ (63\% $  of E. coli strains randomly isolated from chicken meat in Austria were resistant  $ (7) $ . Resistance to tetracycline has been described to be the most prevalent. In this study, we detected tetracycline resistance-transducing phages in three different types of chicken meat samples (a total of 50 samples).



By means of a mathematical model (16) of the transfer of resistance to E. coli by transduction in the gut of cattle, it has been estimated that transduction is on the order of 1,000-fold less efficient than bacterial conjugation at transferring genes (16). It is thus not surprising that resistance to tetracycline and ampicillin, which are the antimicrobials to which E. coli strains isolated from food are the most frequently resistant (27, 35–38), is not significantly associated with phages that transfer resistance. Thus, phage transduction may not be the major mechanism for tetracycline resistance transfer to E. coli strains found on chicken meat. In contrast, phages that transfer kanamycin resistance were more frequently recovered and were significantly associated with the presence of resistant E. coli isolates in the samples that we investigated. These findings indicate not only that phages appear to represent a substantial reservoir of antimicrobial resistance transfer but also demonstrate that different mechanisms of resistance depend on different transfer strategies. Although kanamycin-resistant E. coli isolates are not common in food of animal origin (7, 35), our data show, for the first time, that phage transduction might be a major mechanism for transferring this resistance trait. Although the elements used to transfer tetracycline and ampicillin resistance appear to be dominated by conjugative plasmids or transposons, phages have been shown able to transfer all types of resistance tested, except that associated with ESBL production. ESBL-producing E. coli strains can be found on chicken meat, but data suggest that clonal dissemination is the most prevalent means (39). The resistance genes transduced to E. coli were those most commonly found  $ [aphAI, bla_{TEM}, floR, and tet(A)] $  in these bacteria on chicken meat (27, 36–38). As an example, one gene found to be transduced and to deliver chloramphenicol resistance is the E. coli floR gene, which is almost identical to the floR gene of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT104 and is located in the antimicrobial resistance island flanked by two class 1 integrons.

Recently, lytic phages have been used in phage therapy for the treatment of colibacillosis caused by multiresistant chicken-pathogenic  $ E.\ coli $  strains (40) or for reducing Campylobacter loads in chickens (41). Considering our results, there could possibly be a risk of transduction of antibiotic resistance genes by these phages. Testing the transduction ability of these therapeutic phages could be a tool for avoiding the transduction of antibiotic resistance by these phages.

Phages differ from their bacterial hosts in a number of important properties, such as their ability to persist in the presence of disinfectants  $ (42, 43) $ . Thus, disinfectants used to kill bacteria are, in many cases, not able to eliminate bacteriophages. Some phages are highly resistant to sodium hypochlorite at the concentrations used in the food industry, and this disinfectant does not eliminate or reduce the numbers of most bacteriophages  $ (42) $ . Alcoholic solutions, such as 70% ethanol, have been reported to be unable to harm most bacteriophages  $ (42, 43) $ . It appears that only peracetic acid is a reliable disinfectant for most bacteriophages  $ (42) $ , but at