2

BioMed Research International

emergence and spread of antibiotic-resistant and potentially more pathogenic strains. Antimicrobial-resistant Salmonella spp. have been isolated from different foods of animal origin around the world, which is attributed to the inappropriate use of antimicrobials as therapeutic or prophylactic agents in human and veterinary medicine, as well as the use of growth promoters in animal production  $ [8] $ . Salmonella strains resistant to various antimicrobial agents, particularly resistant to fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins, are considered as an emerging problem worldwide  $ [9] $ , resulting in higher morbidity and mortality rates and higher overall treatment costs. This may represent a public health risk by transfer of resistant Salmonella strains to humans through the consumption of contaminated food and food products. However, the sources and transmission routes of Salmonella in developing countries are poorly understood due to the lack of coordinated national epidemiological surveillance systems  $ [3] $ .

The incidence of foodborne Salmonella infections has increased dramatically in Ethiopia during the past few years. Studies conducted in different parts of the country have demonstrated the presence of Salmonella in human beings  $ [6, 10, 11] $  and in different food animals and food products  $ [10, 12–14] $ . Despite these attempts to report the prevalence and distribution of Salmonella spp. in some food items, humans, and food animals in Ethiopia  $ [10–12] $ , the problem of this pathogen in foods of animal origin is still not well known. However, studies made elsewhere indicated that foods of animal origin are important sources of Salmonella, particularly among those raw food consumers. In Gondar, the most touristic city in Ethiopia, there is not enough information on foodborne Salmonella prevalence in different food items such as foods from animal origin or others. Therefore, this study reports the presence of Salmonella including its antimicrobial-resistant profiles in foods of animal origin in Gondar.

### 2. Materials and Methods

2.1. Study Location. The study was conducted in Gondar, which is located in the northwest of Ethiopia, 740 km away from the capital, Addis Ababa. The town is one of the historic and touristic centers in Ethiopia. The altitude of the town ranges from 1800 to 2200 meters above sea level. It has average rainfall of 1000 millimeters per annum. The annual average maximum and minimum temperature of the town are 30.7°C and 22°C, respectively, with an overall average of 26°C. The town has relative humidity varying from 60% to 70% during the rainy season and from 30% to 40% during the dry season. The human population of the town is estimated at 214 000 inhabitants $ ^{[15]} $ . In the town, a number of people are involved in the public service business, including smallholder farming supplying food animals and animal products to the communities and the slaughterhouse.

2.2. Study Design and Sampling. A cross-sectional study was conducted between February 2014 and December 2015 to assess the prevalence of Salmonella isolates and their antibiotic-resistant profiles from foods of animal origin in Gondar. Stratified random sampling from catering establishments and a list frame of public places were used as sample source according to the accessibility of animal-origin food items. First, we looked up the functional catering establishments registered in the city and then we stratified the public places into strata (cafeterias, hotels, restaurants, and pastry and retail shops) and used them as a sampling frame. Study foods of animal origin were selected during dining time using a simple random sampling method in each public place on proportional bases.



2.3. Animal-Origin Food Items. A total of 384 animal-origin food samples were purchased from restaurants, hotels, cafeterias, and pastry and retail shops, including egg sandwich, minced and raw meat, burger patties, cottage cheese, cream cake, and beef pizza. In addition, raw egg and pasteurized and raw milk were bought from supermarkets and retail shops. Some of the animal-origin foods may not be considered "ready to eat" in all countries, as they would define "ready to eat" as having been processed, such as via cooking to a specific temperature for food safety. However, in Ethiopia, eating raw animal-origin foods like minced and raw beef, as well as milk, is a common practice. Time of sampling was scheduled at the beginning of the serving period (breakfast, lunch, or dinner time). Sterile forceps and spoons were used to transfer the food items from the eating plate to sampling containers. The collected samples were properly identified by sample type, date of collection, and sources and immediately transported to the laboratory in an ice box with freeze packs under completely sterile conditions for microbiological analysis  $ [16] $ .

2.4. Isolation and Identification of Salmonella. Standard cultivation method recommended by the International Organization for Standardization  $ [16] $  was carried out for isolation and identification of Salmonella. Briefly, 25 gm of each food sample was weighed and homogenized in sterile stomacher bag (Stomacher 400R, Seward, England) with 225 mL of preenrichment buffered peptone water for 2 min. The nonselective preenriched sample, from each solid or liquid food sample, was mixed thoroughly and incubated overnight at 37°C. Following incubation, 1 mL of the preenrichment broth was transferred to every 10 mL of tetrathionate broth (Müller-Kaufmann, Oxoid, England), for first selective enrichment of Salmonella growth while inhibiting other microorganisms, and incubated at 37°C for 18–24 hours. In addition, 0.1 mL of preenrichment broth was added to 10 mL of Rappaport-Vassiliadis (Oxoid, England) broth for second selective enrichment and incubated at 41°C for 18–24 hours. For isolation of Salmonella species, each suspected colony from selectively enriched medium was streaked onto selective xylose lysine deoxycholate (XLD) agar plates and incubated at 37°C for 18–24 hours. Salmonella suspected colonies from XLD agar medium were plated onto nutrient agar (Oxoid, England) plates to use for biochemical confirmation.

2.5. Biochemical Confirmation of the Isolates. Each identified colony with typical Salmonella morphology was confirmed biochemically by inoculating into triple sugar iron (TSI) agar, methyl red-Voges-Proskauer (MR-VP) broth, indole