# Prevalence of the Antibiotic Resistance Genes in Coagulase-Positive-and Negative-Staphylococcus in Chicken Meat Retailed to Consumers

**Authors:** Kamelia Osman, Jihan Badr, Khalid S. Al-Maary, Ihab M. I. Moussa, Ashgan M. Hessain, Zeinab M. S. Amin Girah, Usama H. Abo-shama, Ahmed Orabi and Aalaa Saad.

**Affiliations:**
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt; Department of Poultry Diseases, Animal Health Research Institute, Giza, Egypt; Department of Botany and Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Health Science, College of Applied Studies and Community Service, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Poultry Diseases, National Research Center, Giza, Egypt; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Sohag University, Sohag, Egypt.

**Published:** 22 November 2016 | **doi:** 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01846.

---

### Abstract

The use of antibiotics in farm management (growing crops and raising animals) has become a major area of concern. Its implications is the consequent emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) and accordingly their access into the human food chain with passage of antibiotic resistance genes (ARG) to the normal human intestinal microbiota and hence to other pathogenic bacteria causative human disease. Therefore, we pursued in this study to unravel the frequency and the quinolone resistance determining region, *mecA* and *cfr* genes of methicillin-susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus* (MSSA), methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA), methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci (MRCNS) and methicillin-susceptible coagulase-negative staphylococci (MSCNS) isolated from the retail trade of ready-to-eat raw chicken meat samples collected during 1 year and sold across the Great Cairo area.

The 50 *Staphylococcus* isolated from retail raw chicken meat were analyzed for their antibiotic resistance phenotypic profile on 12 antibiotics (penicillin, oxacillin, methicillin, ampicillin-sulbactam, erythromycin, tetracycline, clindamycin, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and vancomycin) and their endorsement of the quinolone resistance determining region, *mecA* and *cfr* genes. The isolation results revealed 50 isolates, CPS (14) and CNS (36), representing ten species (*S. aureus, S. hyicus, S. epidermedius, S. lugdunensis, S. haemolyticus, S. hominus, S. schleiferi, S. cohnii, S. intermedius*, and *S. lentus*). Twenty seven isolates were methicillin-resistant. Out of the characterized 50 staphylococcal isolates, three were MRSA but only 2/3 carried the *mecA* gene. The ARG that bestows resistance to quinolones, -lactams, macrolides, lincosamides, and streptogramin B [MLS(B)] in MRSA and MR-CNS were perceived. According to the available literature, the present investigation was a unique endeavor into the identification of the quinolone-resistance-determining-regions, the identification of MRSA and MR-CNS from retail chicken meat in Egypt. In addition, these isolates might indicate the promulgation of methicillin, oxacillin and vancomycin resistance in the community and imply food safety hazards.

**Keywords:** antimicrobial resistance phenotype, resistance in the quinolone-resistance-determining-regions, biofilm, chicken meat, *mecA* gene.

---

### Introduction

Globally, health-conscious consumers have declined from consuming beef red meat which has been linked to heart disease, to choose leaner and easy digestible meats perceiving chicken, a white meat, to be a healthier option. Numerous potential vehicles of transmission of foodborne pathogens exist and commercial chicken meat has been identified as one of the most important food vehicles for these organisms, antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and antimicrobial resistance genes. However, the bearing of foodborne pathogens in poultry meat and its by-products is a disturbing issue in the poultry industry due to its impact on public health and a challenge to the medical and veterinary officials worldwide. Epidemiologically, poultry meat is of paramount importance and still inculpated as prime source of human food poisoning.

Although specific data on the burden of foodborne disease associated with *Staphylococcus* in poultry meat has been previously limited, yet it has gained importance in the last couple of years. It is considered to be significant to be a disturbing issue in the poultry industry due to its impact on public health and a challenge to the medical and veterinary officials worldwide. The Genus *Staphylococcus* is very well-characterized consisting of 51 species and 27 sub-species. *S. aureus* is the most significant species within this genus, termed as coagulase-positive-Staphylococcus (CPS) by virtue of its versatility as a pathogen in humans and animals in addition to its being one of the causes of food intoxication. Other *Staphylococcus* species, collectively termed coagulase-negative-staphylococci (CNS), have gained importance as they have been implicated to be responsible for a variety of opportunistic infections in humans and animals.

Due to the ubiquity of many of the species within this group, their clinical significance has traditionally been dismissed, and when isolated from clinical specimens, the bacteria have merely been regarded as contaminants. This perception is, however, changing as many species have emerged as important causes of nosocomial infections, particularly in relation to foreign device-related infections and infections in immunocompromised patients. Almost half of all the CNS species that have been identified to date have been implicated in human infections.

The propensity for staphylococci to develop antimicrobial resistance is a cause for great concern in both human and veterinary medicine. Globally, antimicrobial resistance was highlighted as a priority issue due to the increase in the public disquietness about the rampant promulgation of antimicrobial resistant bacteria (AMRB) causing a drop in the food supply as a result of treatment failure of the infected livestock, in addition to curtailment on international animal trade and human traveling. The connection between antibiotic use and antibiotic resistance profiles in chicken and human health has been reviewed by Marshall and Levy (2011) which also included methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA) and which has been found in 12% of animal products—beef, veal, lamb, pork, and a variety of fowl—in Denmark.

Consequently, our endeavor was to reveal the hypothetical implications that chicken meat may serve as a vector for the conveyance of AMRB and AMRG to humans. Therefore, we pursued in this study to probe the quinolone resistance determining region that has not been formerly analyzed, the *mecA* and *cfr* genes of methicillin-susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus* (MSSA), methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA), methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci (MRCNS) and methicillin-susceptible coagulase-negative staphylococci (MSCNS) isolated from the retail trade of ready-to-eat raw chicken meat sold in the retail market.

### Materials and Methods

#### Sample Collection and Processing

Retail chicken (breasts and thighs) products () were collected from 20 retail supermarkets and groceries in the Great Cairo Area during the year 2013. The purchased products at retail were placed in sterile plastic containment (zip-seal bags) then into ice chests with cold blocks to be immediately sent to the Department of Poultry Diseases, Animal Health Research, Institute, Dokki, laboratory for microbiological analyses. Upon arrival at the laboratory, the samples were transferred aseptically into stomacher bags with sterile tongs and weighed. Samples weighing 205 g were hand agitated with 250 ml of sterile 0.1% peptone broth. A 30 ml aliquot of sample wash was added to 30 ml of Baird Parker broth (2x concentration) with tellurite enrichment in a 250 ml sterile Erlenmeyer flask and incubated at  for 18–24 h.

After enrichment, 10 µl of broth was plated onto each of five antibiotic-supplemented Baird Parker agars with EY tellurite enrichment (BD) formulations and one unsupplemented formulation and incubated 18–24h for growth. After enrichment, 10 µl was plated onto Baird Parker agar (BPA) with EY tellurite enrichment and incubated at  18–24 h for growth. Ten microliter were also plated onto CHROMagar MRSA plates and incubated at  24–48 h and examined for growth. Presumptive *S. aureus* (black colonies with clear halos on BPA) and presumptive MRSA (mauve colonies on CHROMagar) were initially screened using conventional methods: Gram staining, coagulase plasma test, hemolysis, catalase production, salt mannitol agar growth, Voges-Proskauer test, the maltose and trehalose fermentation test, susceptibility to polymyxin B test (300 lg, NewProv) and KOH test. Further confirmation was achieved by the API Staph kit.

#### Antibiotic Susceptibility Test

Antibiotic resistance of the 50 isolated *Staphylococcus* spp. was examined using 12 commercial antibiotic discs and performed by the standard disc diffusion method. *S. aureus* ATCC 25923 was plated as a control. After incubation at  for 24h the diameter of inhibition halos around the colonies was measured. The antibiotics used were: penicillin (10 µg), ampicillin-sulbactam (20 µg), chloramphenicol (30 µg), ciprofloxacin (5 µg), erythromycin (15 µg), tetracycline (30 µg), gentamicin (10 µg), clindamycin (2 µg), methicillin (5 µg), oxacillin (1 µg), vancomycin (30 µg), and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (25 µg).

#### Extraction of Staphylococcal DNA and Amplification of the 16S rRNA Gene, Quinolone Resistance Determining Region, *mecA* and *cfr* Genes by PCR

Bacterial genomic DNA was made from all 50 isolates from 2 mL of bacterial suspension from an overnight culture in brain-heart infusion using a protocol previously described. Amplification was performed from the purified genomic DNA and a 0.2 mM concentration of each of the *Staphylococcus* genus-specific primers (16S rRNA gene) was used. Genus-specific confirmation was carried out by PCR using the primers: F: AAC TCT GTT ATT AGG GAA GAA CA and R: CCA CCT TCC TCC GGT TTG TCA CC with annealing temperature:  for 45s to reveal an amplicon of bp 756.

The confirmed staphylococci isolates were confirmed as MRSA using PCR to detect the presence of *mecA* (the gold-standard reference method for this analysis). Four additional antimicrobial resistance genes frequently reported in *S. aureus* conferring resistance in the quinolone-resistance-determining-regions (QRDRs) responsible for quinolone resistance (*gyrA*, *gyrB*, and *grlA* genes) and the *cfr* gene conferring resistance to several classes of antibiotics were also amplified. Gene's targets, primers pair, nucleotide sequences, operative protocols, PCR amplification was performed as described previously (Table 1).

<table border="1">
<caption><b>TABLE 1 | Antimicrobial resistance genes targets, primers, and nucleotide sequences.</b></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Gene designation</th>
<th>Oligonucleotide sequences (5'-3')</th>
<th>Amplicon size (bp)</th>
<th>PCR conditions</th>
<th>References</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"><i>mecA</i></td>
<td>F: GTAGAAATGACTGAACGTCCGATAA</td>
<td rowspan="2">310</td>
<td rowspan="2">Initial denaturation: 95°C for 1 min



Amplification (30 cycles of)



Denaturation: 95°C for 30 s



Annealing: 50°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 60 s



Final extension: 72°C for 4 min</td>
<td rowspan="2">Spanu et al., 2004</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>R: CCAATTCCACATTGTTTCGGTCTAA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"><i>cfr</i></td>
<td>F: TGAAGTATAAAGCAGGTTGGGAGTCA</td>
<td rowspan="2">746</td>
<td rowspan="2">Initial denaturation: 94°C for 1 min



Amplification (34 cycles of)



Denaturation: 94°C for 1 min



Annealing: 48°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 3 min



Final extension: 72°C for 7 min</td>
<td rowspan="2">Kehrenberg and Schwarz, 2006</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>R: ACCATATAATTGACCACAAGCAGC</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"><i>gyrA</i></td>
<td>F: ATGGCTGAATTACCTCAATC</td>
<td rowspan="2">399</td>
<td rowspan="5">Initial denaturation: 95°C for 1 min



Amplification (30 cycles of)



Denaturation: 95°C for 30 s



Annealing: 55°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 60 s



Final extension: 72°C for 4 min</td>
<td rowspan="2">Dubin et al., 1999</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>R: CATCATAGTTATCGATGAAATC</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"><i>grlA</i></td>
<td>F: AATACGTATGATAAGAATTTCCG</td>
<td rowspan="2">429</td>
<td rowspan="3">Linde et al., 2001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>R: GTTGTGTCATCATAGTTTGG</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><i>gyrB</i></td>
<td>F: CAGCGTTAGATGTAGCAAGC



R: CCGATTCCTGTACCAAATGC</td>
<td>250</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Results

The prevalence and diversity of the *Staphylococcus* species isolated from the chicken meat were found to be: out of the 100 chicken meat samples, 50 *Staphylococcus* species were isolated, which were further identified as, 14/50 CPS isolates differentiated into, *S. aureus* () *S. hyicus* (), *S. intermedius* (); and 36/50 CNS isolates identified as *S. epidermidis* (), *S. lugdunensis* (), *S. hemolyticus* (), *S. hominus* (), *S. lentus* (), *S. schleiferi* (), and *S. cohnii* ().

#### Resistance Phenotypes of the Staphylococcus Isolates

Table 2 shows the resistance phenotype of each of the 50 *Staphylococcus* isolates. Complete resistance to penicillin, gentamycin, clindamycin, oxacillin, and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, with resistance to other important antimicrobials was also observed. The antimicrobial resistance profile of the 50 isolated *Staphylococcus* spp to different antibiotics was analyzed; none of the isolates were totally sensitive to the 12 tested antibiotics and 16/50 of the isolates were shown to be resistant to at least 3 antibiotics (*S. lugdunensis*) representing three classes.

<table border="1">
<caption><b>TABLE 2 | Distribution of Staphylococcus spp. isolated from chicken meat samples according to their species diversity and multidrug resistance pattern.</b></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Coagulase reaction</th>
<th>Staphylococcus spp. (n = isolates)</th>
<th>Ampicillin-sulbactam</th>
<th>Chloramphenicol</th>
<th>Ciprofloxacin</th>
<th>Clindamycin</th>
<th>Erythromycin</th>
<th>Gentamycin</th>
<th>Methicillin</th>
<th>Oxacillin</th>
<th>Penicillin</th>
<th>Sulfamethoxazole Trimethoprim</th>
<th>Tetracycline</th>
<th>Vancomycin</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3">Coagulase positive</td>
<td>S. aureus (3)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hyicus (10)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. intermedius (1)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="7">Coagulase negative</td>
<td>S. epidermidis (13)</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. lugdunensis (15)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hemolyticus (1)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hominus (3)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. lentus (1)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. schleiferi (2)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. cohnii (1)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><b>Total</b></td>
<td><b>50</b></td>
<td><b>12</b></td>
<td><b>14</b></td>
<td><b>16</b></td>
<td><b>49</b></td>
<td><b>46</b></td>
<td><b>40</b></td>
<td><b>27</b></td>
<td><b>37</b></td>
<td><b>47</b></td>
<td><b>33</b></td>
<td><b>47</b></td>
<td><b>20</b></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A small percentage of the isolates (less than 50%) demonstrated resistance to oxacillin, methicillin, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, vancomycin, and tetracycline (Table 2). Also resistant to -lactams, such as ampicillin (6/50), penicillin (22/50), methicillin (8/50), and oxacillin (13/50) was evident (Table 2). Forty seven out of the fifty isolates were resistant to penicillin and tetracycline.

#### The Distribution of Antibiotic Resistance Ratios of the Staphylococcus (S) Coagulase Positive (CP)-Negative (CN) That Are Resistant (MR) and Susceptible to Methicillin (MS)

Methicillin resistance in CPS and CNS was calculated to be 64.3 and 52.8%, respectively. The antimicrobial resistance patterns of the isolates are shown in Table 3.

<table border="1">
<caption><b>TABLE 3 | The antibiotic resistance ratios of the Staphylococcus (S) Coagulase positive (CP)- negative (CN) that are resistant (MR) and susceptible to methicillin (MS) (%).</b></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Number of staphylococci = 50



Antibiotics</th>
<th colspan="2">CPS n = 14/50 (28%)</th>
<th colspan="2">CNS n = 36/50 (72%)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>MRCPS (9/14, 64.3%)</th>
<th>MSCPS (5/14, 35.7%)</th>
<th>MRCNS (19/36, 52.8%)</th>
<th>MSCNS (17/36, 47.2%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Ampicillin-sulbactam</td>
<td>28.6</td>
<td>14.3</td>
<td>16.7</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chloramphenicol</td>
<td>35.7</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>11.1</td>
<td>5.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ciprofloxacin</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>19.4</td>
<td>8.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Clindamycin</td>
<td>57.1</td>
<td>35.7</td>
<td>52.8</td>
<td>47.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Erythromycin</td>
<td>42.9</td>
<td>50.0</td>
<td>50.0</td>
<td>41.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gentamycin</td>
<td>42.9</td>
<td>28.6</td>
<td>52.8</td>
<td>30.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Methicillin</td>
<td>64.3</td>
<td>35.7</td>
<td>52.8</td>
<td>47.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Oxacillin</td>
<td>64.3</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>52.8</td>
<td>16.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Penicillin</td>
<td>64.3</td>
<td>28.6</td>
<td>52.8</td>
<td>41.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim</td>
<td>64.3</td>
<td>28.6</td>
<td>38.9</td>
<td>16.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tetracycline</td>
<td>57.1</td>
<td>35.7</td>
<td>47.2</td>
<td>47.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Vancomycin</td>
<td>50.0</td>
<td>21.4</td>
<td>27.8</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A comparison of the resistance patterns revealed that all isolates from chickens showed resistance from three to nine classes of antimicrobial agents (Table 4). Eight isolates showed resistance to oxacillin, undetectable by *mecA* amplification. The three *S. aureus* isolates were resistant to 9–10 antimicrobials (Table 4).

<table border="1">
<caption><b>TABLE 4 | Multidrug resistance profiles and resistance genes of CPS and CNS from chicken meat.</b></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Staphylococcus spp.</th>
<th rowspan="2">Phenotypic resistance combination pattern</th>
<th rowspan="2">n = antibiotics</th>
<th rowspan="2">n = classes</th>
<th colspan="4">Resistance genes</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th><i>mecA</i></th>
<th><i>gyrA/grlA</i></th>
<th><i>gyrB</i></th>
<th><i>cfr</i></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="8"><b>COAGULASE POSITIVE</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3">S. aureus</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="8">S. hyicus</td>
<td>E, CN, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, SXT</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, ME, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, ME, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. intermedius</td>
<td>P, OX, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="8"><b>COAGULASE NEGATIVE</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="10">S. epidermidis</td>
<td>P, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, E, CN, SXT</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, TET, CIP</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, CN, E, DA, TET, CIP</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TET, CIP</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="12">S. lugdunensis</td>
<td>E, DA, TET</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, E, DA, C, TET, SXT</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, TET, CIP</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, TET, CIP</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hemolyticus</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3">S. hominus</td>
<td>P, OX, CN, E, DA, C, TET</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TET, VAN, SXT</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">S. schleiferi</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. cohnii</td>
<td>P, OX, CN, E, DA, TET, SXT</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. lentus</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>ND</td>
<td>+</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<small>C, Chloramphenicol; CIP, Ciprofloxacin; CN, Gentamycin; DA, Clindamycin; E, Erythromycin; MET, Methicillin; OX, Oxacillin; P, Penicillin; SAM, Ampicillin-sulbactam; SXT, Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim; TE, Tetracycline; VA, Vancomycin; ND, not detected. </small>

Two unique susceptibility profiles were identified among the *S. aureus* isolates, with many resistant to multiple clinically important antimicrobial classes (Table 4). In addition, it was noticed that 49/50 *Staphylococcus* isolates were MDR (non-susceptible to >1 agent in 3 antimicrobial classes) while 1/10 of the *S. hyicus* did not apply to this as it was only resistant to two classes of antibiotics although the number of antibiotics were five (P, OX, MET, SAM, and SXT). *S. lentus* was the only species to be PDR as it was resistant to the 12 antibiotics (P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, and CIP) which represented nine classes and consequently, the remaining 48 *Staphylococcus* isolates were XDR as they were resistant to 1 agent in all but 2 classes (Table 4).

#### Antimicrobial Resistance Genes

Of the 50 *Staphylococcus* isolates, two of the CPS species (2/3 *S. aureus*; 4/10 *S. hyicus*) were identified positive for *mecA* (6/50) while six out of the seven CNS species expressed the *mecA* gene (4/13 *S. epidermedius*; *S. lugdunensis* 4/15; *S. haemolyticus* 1/1; *S. hominus* 2/3; *S. schleiferi* 1/2 and *S. lentus* 1/1) (Table 4). With the exception of 1/8 *S. lugdunensis* isolates which was susceptible to oxacillin, *mecA*-positive, four *Staphylococcus* isolates (3/10 *S. hyicus*; 1/1 *S. intermedius*) were resistant to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, erythromycin, methicillin, oxacillin, penicillin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, and vancomycin (Table 4). Forty seven out of the fifty isolates (47/50) were resistant to penicillin and tetracycline, while only one was resistant to chloramphenicol. Methicillin-resistant non-*Staphylococcus aureus* (MRNSA) isolates were resistant to nine of the 12 antimicrobials on the panel, including one to gentamicin. Interestingly, two observations were recorded: (1) one of the three *S. aureus* did not carry the *mecA* gene and was not even phenotypically characterized as MRS (Table 5); and (2) the resistance gene *mecA* was present in the *S. lugdunensis* isolate (1/8) and which was phenotypically characterized as methicillin-susceptible non-*Staphylococcus aureus* (MSNSA) but at the same time phenotypically oxacillin resistant (Table 4).

The resistance gene tested *mecA* was detected in 16/26 methicillin-resistant non-*Staphylococcus aureus* (MRNSA) isolates (Table 5), while *cfr* was not detected in any of the isolates (Table 4).

<table border="1">
<caption><b>TABLE 5 | Prevalence of mecA gene in chicken meat samples.</b></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Staphylococcus spp. (n = isolates)</th>
<th colspan="2">MRS</th>
<th colspan="2">MSS</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>n = (%)</th>
<th>Presence of mecA gene</th>
<th>n = (%)</th>
<th>Presence of mecA gene</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5"><b>COAGULASE POSITIVE</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. aureus (n=3)</td>
<td>3 (66.7)</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hyicus (n=10)</td>
<td>6 (66.7)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. intermedius (n=1)</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5"><b>COAGULASE NEGATIVE</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. epidermedius (n=13)</td>
<td>7 (57.1)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>6 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. lugdunensis (n=15)</td>
<td>7 (0)</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>8 (12.5)</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. haemolyticus (n=1)</td>
<td>1 (100)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. hominus (n=3)</td>
<td>2 (100)</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. schleiferi (n=2)</td>
<td>2 (50)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. cohnii (n=1)</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S. lentus (n=1)</td>
<td>1 (100)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><b>Total (n=50)</b></td>
<td><b>29 (58%)</b></td>
<td><b>18 (62.1%)</b></td>
<td><b>21 (42%)</b></td>
<td><b>1 (3.5%)</b></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Of the three MSSA isolates, two carried the *gyrA* gene and one carried the *gyrB* gene (Table 4). The 50 isolates of *Staphylococcus* species namely: *aureus, hyicus, simulans, lugdunensis, hominus, hemolyticus, epidermidis, intermedius*, and *S. sciuri* were non-*cfr*-carriers. Our susceptibility testing showed that, all non-*cfr*-carrying staphylococci (23/50) were resistant to the 12 antibiotics tested in the present with varying degrees. Of the 50 isolates, 40/50 isolates were gentamicin-resistant, 37/50 were oxacillin resistant while only 16/50 were ciprofloxacin-resistant. The results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing indicated that the non-*cfr*-carrying CNS exhibited also expanded resistance to antimicrobial agents other than those included in the *cfr*-mediated PhLOPSA phenotype (Table 4). It was possible to conclude that 25/34 of the MR-NSA strains were potentially methicillin resistant. However, these results were evidently different from those obtained by PCR, in which the gene *mecA* was detected in only 16/47 of the CNSA isolates (Table 5).

### Discussion

In previous investigations, the frequency of *S. aureus* in the chicken meat was found to be 33.3% in The Netherlands, 4% in Egypt, 22.7% in Switzerland and 65% in Japan. The authors traced back the source of contamination to particular slaughterhouses in Switzerland while in Egypt poor hygienic and sanitary conditions in addition to the contaminated butchers and meat handlers during the process of slaughtering and evisceration of the bird could be the main cause for the 50% prevalence recorded in the present investigation.

The coexistence of two subpopulations (one susceptible and the other resistant) within a culture of staphylococci could hinder an explicit detection of oxacillin/methicillin resistance. All cells in a culture may carry the genetic information for resistance, but only a small number may express the resistance *in vitro*. This phenomenon is termed heteroresistance and occurs in staphylococci resistant to penicillinase-stable penicillins, such as oxacillin. Cells expressing heteroresistance grow more slowly than the oxacillin-susceptible population and may be missed at temperatures above . This is why CLSI recommends incubating isolates being tested against oxacillin for a full 24 h before reading. Oxacillin maintains its activity during storage better than methicillin and is more likely to detect heteroresistant strains.

Previously, Petrelli et al. (2008) found a significant correlation between oxacillin resistance and resistance to erythromycin, clindamycin, gentamycin and ciprofloxacin, which is in queue with our findings; but on evaluating our results, penicillin and tetracycline resistance were also found to be significantly correlated with oxacillin resistance. It should be noted that, widespread veterinary usage of the fluoroquinolones, particularly in Europe, has been implicated and that being a second-generation fluoroquinolone, is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines and the most important medications needed in a basic health system. Fearfully, this could lead to a rapid and sudden evolvement of resistance to ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones, even during a course of treatment. This documentation is consistent with antecedent investigations and substantiates the allegations of MRSA causing healthcare-associated infections as being MDR to the traditionally prescribed drugs (erythromycin, clindamycin, fluoroquinolones, and tetracycline), while strains inducing community-associated infections are generally solely resistant to -lactam agents, erythromycin while feasibly fluoroquinolone resistant.

Since 1996, MRSA strains with decreased susceptibility to vancomycin and strains fully resistant to vancomycin have been reported a fact which should be taken into consideration in the Egyptian community as we detected a 20% resistance to vancomycin. Methicillin resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) and vancomycin resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (VRSA) are some of the prominent pathogens that cause a wide variety of infections in humans and animals. It should be emphasized that the present investigation highlights the importance of a sustainable surveillance program for any signs of vancomycin resistance emergence in Egypt concerning the medical and veterinary health condition in conjunction to typing and origin of the isolates. An increase in the cases of incompetent antibiotic treatment and mortality rates in avian disease is a common outcome of methicillin resistance, generating critical community health concern. Considering the limited options disease medication caused by MDR staphylococcal species, it is worrisome that CNS resistant to broad-spectrum antibiotics have been introduced in the community through the food chain. Regarding the CNS identified in this study, *S. cohnii* and *S. lentus* have been signified to yield enterotoxins.

Batista et al. (2013) have shown that oxacillin is more sensitive for predicting methicillin resistance, since 100% of isolates containing the *mecA* gene were phenotypically resistant to oxacillin, whereas only 13.3% were resistant to cefoxitin. Thus, the test using cefoxitin may not accurately reflect the phenotypic resistance of CNS, which has also been observed by other authors. To avoid misinterpretation, the detection of the *mecA* gene (the commonest gene that imparts oxacillin resistance in staphylococci) by nucleic acid amplification tests, such as the PCR, is currently considered the criterion standard for identification of MRSA strains but this has not yet been established for CNS. The risk of transmission of resistance genes by horizontal interspecies transfer was clear and has been described by others.

Foodborne pathogens, such as MRSA have become a global problem after being in North America, Europe and Asia. MRSA in chicken meat showed its highest prevalence from Germany (37.2%) followed by Netherlands (16.0%). On the other hand, low levels of MRSA in chicken meat were recorded in Japan, Jordan to reach 0.3% in Korea and 0% in Austria. There are also reports of now the fourth phase has also been started which shows evidences that both animal and human MRSA has been detected on meat. Studies in Japan and Korea reported human MRSA from chicken meat. Taiwanese study reported MRSA in chicken carcasses. MRSA have also been detected from the foods, such as meat products and raw chicken meat. Regardless of the ongoing endorsed methodizes for the MRSA susceptibility testing, Lee et al. (2004) demonstrated a variance in the phenotypic expression of resistance being affected by the cellular growth conditions and that several MRSA isolates which were phenotypically resistant to oxacillin, did not encode the *mecA* gene. MRSA can be found worldwide and Doyle et al. (2011) summarized the global survival results in raw meats, which indicated that the incidence of MRSA was infrequent in poultry meat when compared to the beef and pork meats and with variable prevalences between regions.

Antibiotic resistance patterns of individual pathogens to the drugs used to treat them vary considerably between and within countries. The discrepancies and uncomparable results between researchers, including us, was incriminated by Kluytmans et al. (1995), Chaibenjawong and Foster (2011), Doyle et al. (2011) and Omurtag et al. (2013) to be due to several criteria, such as: (i) sampling and culture methods differed among the studies; (ii) the condition of the meat when being sold is it packed or un-packed in the supermarkets or through the widely spread butcher shops in Great Cairo; (iii) MRSA carriers can contaminate meat during slaughter and processing; (iv) pathogen load on raw meat changes according to species; (v) heat treatment and cross-contamination change the pathogen titre on the meat; (vi) serving frequency and size, and demographic data; (vii) regional differences and social groups dissimilarities are conditions that must be taken into consideration; (viii) infected/colonized food handlers are favorable causes for meat contamination (ix) under conditions of temperature abuse, MSSA and MRSA cells could multiply on meat; (ix) the unjuridical use of antibiotics for animals; (x) different patterns of antibiotic use; (xi) distinct national disease burdens; (xii) disparities in access to first and second-line treatments; and (xiii) the burden of coinfections.

Eventually, AMR drugs have become a global public health crisis implicating the importance of preventing contamination of food with MRSA, which could have trade consequences and exert coercion to those sovereignties with un-controlled antimicrobial practices to create and enforce proper danger administration strategies. Therefore, the use of antibiotics for animals and their documentation has become a must to aid in analyzing their use and consequent impact on public health to enact policy changes on the consumption of antibiotics.

### Conclusion

The occurrence of CNS in food should not be ignored nor their pathogenic potential considered as insignificant as a food-borne pathogen, rather safety measures should be taken to reduce or totally eliminate their occurrence in foods. The incidence of CNS may render food unsafe, as the clinical isolates have been reported to exude virulent traits. Our findings emphasize the need for improved hygiene practices during food processing and also during the distribution and consumption of the final food products to avoid the presence of CNS and CPS isolates in meat. The present study cynosures that the MRS has entered the food chain in Egypt through the raw chicken meat constituting a health hazard to consumers and should be given importance due to their zoonotic importance. This necessitates the urgent implementation of an energetic policy to ensure microbiological food safety to prevent the spread of MRS through the food chain by contamination of raw meat. In addition, these isolates might indicate the promulgation of methicillin, oxacillin, and vancomycin resistance in the community and imply food safety hazards.

### References

* Aarestrup, F. M., and Schwarz, S. (2006). "Antimicrobial resistance in staphylococci and streptococci of animal origin," in *Antimicrobial Resistance in Bacteria of Animal Origin*, ed F. M. Aarestrup (Washington, DC: ASM Press), 187–212.


* Abdalrahman, L. S., Stanley, A., Wells, H., and Fakhr, M. K. (2015). Isolation, Virulence, and Antimicrobial Resistance of Methicillin-Resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) and Methicillin Sensitive *Staphylococcus aureus* (MSSA) Strains from Oklahoma Retail Poultry Meats. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 12, 6148–6161. doi: 10.3390/ijerph120606148.


* Acar, J. F., and Moulin, G. (2012). Antimicrobial resistance: a complex issue. Rev. Sci. Tech. 31, 23–31. doi: 10.20506/rst.31.1.2098.


* Anderson-Berry, A., Brinton, B., Lyden, E., and Faix, R. G. (2011). Risk factors associated with development of persistent coagulase negative staphylococci bacteremia in the neonate and associated short-term and discharge morbidities. *Neonatology* 99, 23–31. doi: 10.1159/000292567.


* APUA (2010a). *Policy Brief and Recommendations #4 Misuse of Antibiotics in Food Animal Production Antibiotic Misuse in Food Animals - Time for Change*. Boston, MA: Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics.


* APUA (2010b). *Antibiotics in Food Animal Production: A Forty Year Debate*. Vol. 28. Boston, MA: Alliance for the prudent use of antibiotics.


* Bagcigil, F. A., Moodley, A., Baptiste, K. E., Jensen, V. F., and Guardabassi, L. (2007). Occurrence, species distribution, antimicrobial resistance and clonality of methicillin-and erythromycin-resistant staphylococci in the nasal cavity of domestic animals. Vet. Microbiol, 121, 307–315. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2006.12.007.


* Bakr, W. M., Fawzi, M., and Hashish, M. H. (2004). Detection of coagulase positive staphylococci in meat products sold in Alexandria using two different media. J. Egypt Public Health Assoc. 79, 31–42.


* Bakshi, C. S., Shah, D. H., Verma, R., Singh, R. K., and Malik, M. (2005). Rapid differentiation of *Mycobacterium bovis* and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* based on a 12.7-kb fragment by a single tube multiplex-PCR. Vet. Microbiol. 109, 211–216. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.05.015.


* Balaban, N., and Rasooly, A. (2000). Staphylococcal enterotoxins. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 61, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/S0168-1605(00)00377-9.


* Bannerman, T. L. (2003). "Staphylococcus, Micrococcus and other catalase-positive cocci that grow aerobically," in *Manual of Clinical Microbiology*, 8th Edn., eds P. R. Murray, E. J. Baron, J. H. Jorgensen, M. A. Pfaller, and R. H. Yolken (Washington, DC: ASM Press), 384–404.


* Batista, J. E., Ferreira, E. L., Nascimento, D. C., Ventura, R. F., de Oliveira, W. L., Leal, N. C., et al. (2013). Antimicrobial resistance and detection of the mecA gene besides enterotoxin-encoding genes among coagulase-negative Staphylococci isolated from clam meat of *Anomalocardia brasiliana*. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 10, 1044–1049. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2013.1576.


* Becker, K., Heilmann, C., and Peters, G. (2014). Coagulase-negative staphylococci. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 27, 870–926. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00109-13.


* Bhargava, K., Wang, X., Donabedian, S., Zervos, M., da Rocha, L., and Zhang, Y. (2011). Methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in retail meat, Detroit, Michigan, USA [letter]. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 17, 1135–1137. doi: 10.3201/eid/1706.101905.


* Bhargava, K., and Zhang, Y. (2014). Characterization of methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci (MRCONS) in retail meat. *Food Microbiol.* 42, 56–60. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2014.02.019.


* Bloemendaal, A. L., Brouwer, E. C., and Fluit, A. C (2010). Methicillin resistance transfer from *Staphylocccus epidermidis* to methicillin-susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus* in a patient during antibiotic therapy. *PLoS ONE* 5:e11841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011841.


* Boost, M. V., Wong, A., Ho, J., and O'Donoghue, M. (2013). Isolation of Methicillin-Resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) from retail meats in Hong Kong. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 10, 705–710. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2012.1415.


* Bortolaia, V., Espinosa-Gongora, C., and Guardabassi, L. (2016). Human health risks associated with antimicrobial-resistant enterococci and *Staphylococcus aureus* on poultry meat. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 22, 130–140. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2015.12.003.


* Capita, R., Alonso-Calleja, C., Garcia-Fernandez, M. C., and Moreno, B. (2002). Characterization of *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from poultry meat in Spain. Poult. Sci. 81, 414–421. doi: 10.1093/ps/81.3.414.


* CDC (2013). *Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) Infections*. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.


* CDDEP (2015). Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy. 2015. *State of the World's Antibiotics*. Washington, DC: CDC.


* Chah, K. F., Gómez-Sanz, E., Nwanta, J. A., Asadu, B., Agbo, I. C., Lozano, C., et al. (2014). Methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci from healthy dogs in Nsukka, Nigeria. Braz. J. Microbiol. 45, 215–220. doi: 10.1590/1517-83822014005000034.


* Chaibenjawong, P., and Foster, S. J. (2011). Desiccation tolerance in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Archiv. Microbiol. 193, 125–135. doi: 10.1007/s00203-010-0653-x.


* Chajęcka-Wierzchowska, W., Zadernowska, A., Nalepa, B., Sierpińska, M., and Laniewska-Trokenheim, L. (2015). Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CONS) isolated from ready-to-eat food of animal origin-phenotypic and genotypic antibiotic resistance. *Food Microbiol.* 46, 222–226. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2014.08.001.


* CLSI (2013). *Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. CLSI Approved Standard M100-S23*. Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute.


* Cortes, J. A., Leal, A. L., Montañez, A. M., Buitrago, G., Castillo, J. S., Guzman, L., et al. (2013). Frequency of microorganisms isolated in patients with bacteremia in intensive care units in Colombia and their resistance profiles. Braz. J. Infect. Dis. 17, 346–352. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2012.10.022.


* Cunha, M. (2009). "Staphylococcus aureus and bovine mastitis: a public health problem," in *Cross Infections: Types, Causes and Prevention*, eds J. Dong and X. Liang (New York, NY: Nova Science Publishers), 117–128.


* Cuny, C., Friedrich, A., Kozytska, S., Layer, F., Nübel, U., Ohlsen, K., et al. (2010). Emergence of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) in different animal species. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 300, 109–117. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2009.11.002.


* CVM (2009). *Update On Extra-Label Use Of Fluoroquinolones*. Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM).


* CVM/FDA (2015). Center for Veterinary Medicine/ Center for Veterinary Medicine. Update on Antimicrobial Resistance Activities at the FDA. U.S. FDA Office of International Programs 5th Biannual Educational Forum.


* Davies, J., and Davies, D. (2010). Origins and Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 74, 417–433. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00016-10.


* de Boer, E., Zwartkruis-Nahuis, J. T., Wit, B., Huijsdens, X. W., de Neeling, A. J., Bosch, T., et al. (2009). Prevalence of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in meat. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 134, 52–56. doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.12.007.


* Dobranić, V., Zdolec, N., Račić, I., Vujnović, A., Zdelar-Tuk, M., Filipović, I., et al. (2013). Determination of enterotoxin genes in coagulase-negative staphylococci from autochthonous Croatian fermented sausages. Vet. Arh. 83, 145–152.


* Doyle, M. E., Hartmann, F. A., Lee, A. C., and Wong, R. I. (2011). *Food Safety Review: White Paper on Sources of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Other Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci: Implications for Our Food Supply?* Available online at: [http://fri.wisc.edu/docs/pdf/FRI_Brief_MRSA_Feb2011.pdf](https://www.google.com/search?q=http://fri.wisc.edu/docs/pdf/FRI_Brief_MRSA_Feb2011.pdf).


* Dubin, D. T., Fitzgibbon, J. E., Nahvi, M. D., and John, J. F. (1999). Topoisomerase sequences of coagulase-negative staphylococcal isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin or trovafloxacin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 43, 1631–1637.


* Feßler, A. T., Kadlec, K., Hassel, M., Hauschild, T., Eidam, C., Ehricht, R., et al. (2011). Characterization of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* isolates from food and food products of poultry origin in germany. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 7151–7157. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00561-11.


* Fowoyo, P. T., and Ogunbanwo, S. T. (2016). Virulence and toxigenicity of coagulase-negative Staphylococci in Nigerian traditional fermented foods. Can. J. Microbiol. 62, 572–578. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2015-0752.


* Frigatto, E. A., Machado, A. M., Pignatari, A. C., and Gales, A. C. (2005). Is the cefoxitin disk test reliable enough to detect oxacillin resistance in coagulase-negative Staphylococci? J. Clin. Microbiol. 43, 2028–2029. doi: 10.1128/JCM.43.4.2028-2029.2005.


* Gould, I. M. (2010). VRSA-doomsday superbug or damp squib? Lancet Infect. Dis. 10, 816–818. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(10)70259-0.


* Grundmann, H., Aanensen, D. M., Wijngaard, V. D., Spratt, C. C., Harmsen, B. G., Friedrich, A. W., et al. (2010). Geographic distribution of *Staphylococcus aureus* causing invasive infections in Europe: a molecular-epidemiological analysis. *PLoS Med.* 7:e1000215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000215.


* Hadžiosmanović, M., Gasparik-Reichardt, J., Smajlović, M., Vesković-Moračanin, S., and Zdolec, N. (2005). Possible use of bacteriocins and starter cultures in upgrading of quality and safety of traditionally fermented sausages. Tehnol. Mesa 46, 194–211.


* Han, J. E., Hwang, S. Y., Kim, J. H., Shin, S. P., Jun, J. W., Chai, J. Y., et al. (2013). CPRMethicillin resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci isolated from South Korean ducks exhibiting tremor. Acta Vet. Scand. 55:88. doi: 10.1186/1751-0147-55-88.


* Hanson, B. M., Dressler, A. E., Harper, A. L., Scheibel, R. P., Wardyn, S. E., Roberts, L. K., et al. (2011). Prevalence of *Staphylococcus aureus* and methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) on retail meat in Iowa. J. Infect. Public Health 4, 169–174. doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2011.06.001.


* Hathwar, S. C., Rai, A. K., Modi, V. K., and Narayan, B. (2012). Characteristics and consumer acceptance of healthier meat and meat product formulations-a review. J. Food Sci. Technol. 49, 653–664. doi: 10.1007/s13197-011-0476-z.


* He, W., Liu, Y., Qi, J., Chen, H., Zhao, C., Zhang, F., et al. (2013). Food-Animal related *Staphylococcus aureus* multidrug-resistant ST9 strains with toxin genes. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 10, 782–788. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2012.1452.


* Hung, K. H., Yan, J. J., Lu, Y. C., Chen, H. M., and Wu, J. J. (2011). Evaluation of discrepancies between oxacillin and cefoxitin susceptibility in coagulase-negative staphylococci. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 30, 785–788. doi: 10.1007/s10096-011-1156-7.


* Ibrahem, S., Salmenlinna, S., Virolainen, A., Kerttula, A. M., Lyttikäinen, O., Jägerroos, H., et al. (2009). Carriage of methicillin-resistant staphylococci and their SCCmec types in a long-term-care facility. J. Clin. Microbiol. 47, 32–37. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01085-08.


* Islam, N. N., Akter, M., Farzana, Z., Bin Kader, A. J., Uddin, I., Zonaed Siddiki, A. M. A. M., et al. (2014). Detection of *Staphylococcus aureus* in frozen chicken rinse through bacteriological and Nuc gene specific PCR methods and their drug resistance patterns in Southern Chittagong, Bangladesh. Res. J. Microbiol. 9, 251–264. doi: 10.3923/jm.2014.251.264.


* Jean-Baptiste, N., Benjamin, D. K., Wolkowiez, C. M., Fowler, V. G., Laughon, M., Clark, R. H., et al. (2011). Coagulase negative staphylococcal infections in the neonatal intensive care unit. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 32, 679–686. doi: 10.1086/660361.


* Jørgensen, H., Mørk, T., Caugant, D., Kearns, A., and Rørvik, L. (2005). Genetic variation among *Staphylococcus aureus* strains from Norwegian bulk milk. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 8352–8361. doi: 10.1128/AEM.71.12.8352-8361.2005.


* Kadariya, J., Smith, T. C., and Thapaliya, D. (2014). *Staphylococcus aureus* and Staphylococcal Food-Borne disease: an ongoing challenge in public health. BioMed Res. Int. 2014:827965. doi: 10.1155/2014/827965.


* Kehrenberg, C., and Schwarz, S. (2006). Distribution of florfenicol resistance genes fexA and cfr among chloramphenicol-resistant *Staphylococcus* isolates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50, 1156–1163. doi: 10.1128/AAC.50.4.1156-1163.2006.


* Khallaf, M., Benbakhta, B., Nasri, I., Sarhane, B., Senouci, S., and Ennaji, M. M. (2014). Prevalence of *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from chicken meat marketed in Rabat, Morocco. Int. J. Innovation Appl. Studies 7, 1665–1670.


* Kitai, S., Shimizu, A., Kawano, J., Sato, E., Nakano, C., Uji, T., et al. (2005). Characterization of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from retail raw chicken meat in Japan. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 67, 107–110. doi: 10.1292/jvms.67.107.


* Kluytmans, J., Van Leeuwen, W., Goessens, W., Hollis, R., Messer, S., Herwaldt, L., et al. (1995). Food-initiated outbreak of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* analyzed by pheno- and genotyping. J. Clin. Microbiol. 33, 1121–1128.


* Lee, J. H. (2003). Methicillin (Oxacillin)-Resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* strains isolated from major food animals and their potential transmission to humans. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 6489–6494. doi: 10.1128/AEM.69.11.6489-6494.2003.


* Lee, J. H., Jeong, J., Park, Y., Choi, S., Kim, Y., Chae, J., et al. (2004). Evaluation of the methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA)- screen latex agglutination test for detection of MRSA of animal origin. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 2780–2782. doi: 10.1128/JCM.42.6.2780-2782.2004.


* Lim, S. K., Nam, H. M., Park, H. J., Lee, H. S., Choi, M. J., Jung, S. C., et al. (2010). Prevalence and characterization of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in raw meat in Korea. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 20, 775–778. doi: 10.4014/jmb.0912.12022.


* Lin, J., Yeh, K. S., Liu, H. T., and Lin, J. H. (2009). *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from pork and chicken carcasses in Taiwan: prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility. J. Food Prot. 72, 608–211.


* Linde, H. J., Schmidt, M., Fuchs, E., Reischl, U., Niller, H. H., and Lehn, N. (2001). In vitro activities of six Quinolones and mechanisms of resistance in *Staphylococcus aureus* and coagulase-negative Staphylococci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45, 1553–1557. doi: 10.1128/AAC.45.5.1553-1557.2001.


* Livermore, D. M. (2000). Antibiotic resistance in staphylococci. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 16, S3–S10. doi: 10.1016/s0924-8579(00)00299-5.


* Lowy, F. (2013). "Staphylococcal infections," in *Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine*, 18th Edn., eds A. Fauci, E. Braunwald, and D. Casper (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill), 386–399.


* Magiorakos, A. P., Srinivasan, A., Carey, R. B., Carmeli, Y., Falagas, M. E., Giske, C. G., et al. (2012). Multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-resistant bacteria: an international expert proposal for interim standard definitions for acquired resistance. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18, 268–281. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03570.x.


* Marra, A. R., Camargo, L. F., Pignatari, A. C., Sukiennik, T., Behar, P. R., Medeiros, E. A., et al. (2011). Nosocomial bloodstream infections in Brazilian hospitals: analysis of 2,563 cases from a prospective nationwide surveillance study. J. Clin. Microbiol. 49, 1866–1871. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00376-11.


* Marshall, B. M., and Levy, S. B. (2011). Food animals and antimicrobials: impacts on human health. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 24, 718–733. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00002-11.


* Martins, P. D., de Almeida, T. T., Basso, A. P., de Moura, T. M., Frazzon, J., Tondo, E. C., et al. (2013). Coagulase-Positive staphylococci isolated from chicken meat: pathogenic potential and vancomycin resistance. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 10, 771–776. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2013.1492.


* Mathema, B., Mediavilla, J., Chen, I., and Kreiswirth, B. (2009). "Evolution and taxonomy of Staphylococci," in *Staphylococci in Human Disease*, 2nd Edn., eds D. Crossley, K. Jefferson, G. Archer, and V. Fowler (Singapore: Wiley-Blackwell), 31–64.


* deKraker, M. E., Davey, P. G., and Grundmann, H. (2011). Mortality and hospital stay associated with resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* and *Escherichia coli* bacteremia: estimating the burden of antibiotic resistance in Europe. *PLoS Med.* 8:e1001104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001104.


* Momtaz, H., Dehkordi, F. S., Rahimi, E., Asgarifar, A., and Momeni, M. (2013). Virulence genes and antimicrobial resistance profiles of *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from chicken meat in Isfahan province, Iran. J. Appl. Poult. Res. 22, 913–921. doi: 10.3382/japr.2012-00673.


* Normanno, G., Corrente, M., Salandra, G., Dambrosio, A., Quaglia, N. C., Parisi, A., et al. (2007). Methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) in foods of animal origin product in Italy. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 117, 219–222. doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.04.006.


* Oliveira, D. C., and de Lencastre, H. (2002). Multiplex PCR strategy for rapid identification of structural types and variants of the mec element in methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother.* 46, 2155–2161. doi: 10.1128/AAC.46.7.2155-2161.2002.


* Omurtag, I., Paulsen, P., Hilbert, F., and Smulders, F. J. M. (2013). The risk of transfer of foodborne bacterial hazards in Turkey through the consumption of meat; risk ranking of muscle foods with the potential to transfer *Campylobacter* spp. *Food Secur.* 5, 117–127. doi: 10.1007/s12571-012-0230-z.


* One Health Commission (2014). *Why One Health?* Apex, NC. Available online at: [https://www.onehealthcommission.org/en/why_one_health/](https://www.onehealthcommission.org/en/why_one_health/).


* Osman, K. M., Abd El-Razik, K. A., Marie, H. S. H., and Arafa, A. (2016a). Coagulase-negative staphylococci collected from bovine milk: species and antimicrobial gene diversity. J. Food Saf. 36, 89–99. doi: 10.1111/jfs.12216.


* Osman, K. M., Amer, A. M., Badr, J. M., Helmy, N. M., Elhelw, R. A., Orabi, A., et al. (2016b). Antimicrobial resistance, biofilm formation and mecA characterization of methicillin-susceptible *S. aureus* and Non-*S. aureus* of Beef Meat Origin in Egypt. Front. Microbiol. 7:222. doi: 10.3389/fmich.2016.00222.


* Otto, M. (2012). Coagulase-negative staphylococci as reservoirs of genes facilitating MRSA infection. *Bioessays* 35, 4–11. doi: 10.1002/bies.201200112.


* Owuna, G., Abimiku, R. H., Nkene, I. H., Joseph, G. W., and Ijalana, O. O. (2015). Isolation and Antibiotic Susceptibility of *Staphylococcus aureus* from Fresh Poultry Meat Sold in Keffi Metropolis, Nigeria. Int. J. Res. Studies Biosci. 3, 1–5.


* Pantosti, A. (2012). Methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* associated with animals and its relevance to human health. Front. Microbiol. Antimicrob. Resis. Chemother. 3:127. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00127.


* Persoons, D., Van Hoorebeke, S., Hermans, K., Butaye, P., de Kruif, A., Haesebrouck, F., et al. (2009). Methicillin-Resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in Poultry. Emerging Infect. Dis. 15, 452–453. doi: 10.3201/eid1503.080696.


* Pesavento, G., Ducci, B., Comodo, N., and Lo Nostro, A. (2007). Antimicrobial resistance profile of *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from raw meat: a research for methicillin resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA). *Food Control* 18, 196–200. doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2005.09.013.


* Petrelli, D., Repetto, A., D'Ercole, S., Rombini, S., Ripa, S., Prenna, M., et al. (2008). Analysis of meticillin-susceptible and meticillin-resistant biofilm-forming *Staphylococcus aureus* from catheter infections isolated in a large Italian hospital. J. Med. Microbiol. 57, 364–372. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47621-0.


* Phillips, I., Casewell, M., Cox, T., De Groot, B., Friis, C., Jones, R., et al. (2004). Does the use of antibiotics in food animals pose a risk to human health? A critical review of published data. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 53, 28–52. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkg483.


* Pinto, J. B., Rossatto, F. C. P., Martins, P. D., and Frazzon, A. P. G. (2015). Genetic relationships and virulence factors in *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from raw poultry in South Brazil. Ann. Microbiol. 65, 1933–1940. doi: 10.1007/s13213-014-1031-8.


* Plata, K., Rosato, A. E., and Wegrzyn, G. (2009). *Staphylococcus aureus* as an infectious agent: overview of biochemistry and molecular genetics of its pathogenicity. Acta Biochim. Pol. 56, 597–612.


* Podkowik, M., Park, J. Y., Seo, K. S., Bystro, J., and Bania, J. (2013). Enterotoxigenic potential of coagulase-negative staphylococci. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 163, 34–40. doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.02.005.


* Quddoumi, S. S., Bdour, S. M., and Mahasneh, A. M. (2006). Isolation and characterization of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* from livestock and poultry meat. Ann. Microbiol. 56, 155–161. doi: 10.1007/BF03174998.


* Ruban, S. W., and Fairoze, N. (2011). Effect of processing conditions on microbiological quality of market poultry meats in bangalore, india. J. Anim. Vet. Adv. 10, 188–191. doi: 10.3923/javaa.2011.188.191.


* Schraft, H., Kleinlein, N., and Untermann, F. (1992). Contamination of pig hindquarters with *Staphylococcus aureus*. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 15, 191–194. doi: 10.1016/0168-1605(92)90148-V.


* Spanu, T., Sanguinetti, M., D'Inzeo, T., Ciccaglione, D., Romano, L., Leone, F., et al. (2004). Identification of methicillin-resistant isolates of *Staphylococcus aureus* and coagulase-negative Staphylococci responsible for bloodstream infections with the Phoenix TM system. Diag. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 48, 221–227. doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2003.11.004.


* Šušković, J., Kos, B., Beganović, J., Leboš Pavunc, A., Habjanič, K., and Matošić, S. (2010). Antimicrobial activity the most important property of probiotic and starter lactic acid bacteria. Food Technol. Biotechnol. 48, 296–307.


* Taponen, S., and Pyörälä, S. (2009). Coagulase-negative staphylococci as cause of different from *Staphylococcus aureus*. Vet. Microbiol. 134, 29–36. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.09.011.


* Teramoto, H., Salaheen, S., and Biswas, D. (2016). Contamination of post-harvest poultry products with multidrug resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in Maryland-Washington DC metro area. *Food Control* 65, 132–135. doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.01.024.


* Tong, S. Y. C., Davis, J. S., Eichenberger, E., Holland, T. L., and Fowler, V. G. Jr. (2015). *Staphylococcus aureus* infections: epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, and management. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 28, 603–661. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00134-14.


* Vanderhaeghen, W., Hermans, K., Haesebrouck, F., and Butaye, P. (2010). Methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) in food production animals. Epidem. Infect. 138, 606–625. doi: 10.1017/S0950268809991567.


* van Loo, I., Huijsdens, X., Tiemersma, E., de Neeling, A., van de Sande-Bruinsma, Beaujean, D., et al. (2007). Emergence of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* of animal origin in humans. Emerging Infect. Dis. 13, 1834–1839. doi: 10.3201/eid1312.070384.


* Venkatesh, M. P., Placencia, F., and Weisman, L. E. (2006). Coagulase negative staphylococcal infections in the neonate and child: an update. Semin. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. 17, 120–127. doi: 10.1053/j.spid.2006.06.005.


* Verraes, C., Van Boxstael, S., Van Meervenne, E., Van Coillie, E., Butaye, P., Catry, B., et al. (2013). Antimicrobial resistance in the food chain: A Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 10, 2643–2669. doi: 10.3390/ijerph10072643.


* Vitali, L. A., Petrelli, D., Lamikanra, A., Prenna, M., and Akinkunmi, E. O. (2014). Diversity of antibiotic resistance genes and staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec elements in faecal isolates of coagulase-negative staphylococci from Nigeria. *BMC Microbiol.* 14:106. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-106.


* von Wintersdorff, C. J. H., Penders, J., van Niekerk, J. M., Mills, N. D., Majumder, S., van Alphen, L. B., et al. (2016). Dissemination of antimicrobial resistance in microbial ecosystems through horizontal gene transfer. Front. Microbiol. 7:173. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00173.


* Vuong, C., and Otto, M. (2002). *Staphylococcus epidermidis* infections. *Microbes Infect.* 4, 481–489. doi: 10.1016/S1286-4579(02)01563-0.


* WHO (2012). *World Health Organization The Evolving Threat of Antimicrobial Resistance - Options for Action*. Geneva: World Health Organization.


* WHO (2013). *World Health Organization Integrated Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance Guidance from a WHO Advisory Group*. Geneva: World Health Organization.


* WHO (2015). *19th WHO Model List of Essential Medicines (April 2015)*. Geneva: World Health Organization Essential Medicines and Health Products.


* World Economic Forum (2013). *Global Risks*. Geneva: World Economic Forum.


* Xin, W., Guanghui, L., Xiaodong, X., Baowei, Y., Meili, X., and Jianghong, M. (2014). Antimicrobial susceptibility and molecular typing of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in retail foods in shaanxi, China. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 11, 281–286. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2013.1643.


* Yurdakul, N. E., Erginkaya, Z., and Ünal, E. (2013). Antibiotic resistance of enterococci, coagulase negative staphylococci and *Staphylococcus aureus* isolated from chicken meat. *Czech J. Food Sci.* 31, 14–19.


* Zaraket, H., Otsuka, T., Saito, K., Dohmae, S., Takano, T., Higuchi, W., et al. (2007). Molecular characterization of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in hospitals in Niigata, Japan: divergence and transmission. Microbiol. Immunol. 51, 171–176. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2007.tb03898.x.


* Zarfel, G., Galler, H., Luxner, J., Petternel, C., Reinthaler, F. F., Haas, D., et al. (2014). Multiresistant bacteria isolated from chicken meat in Austria. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 11, 12582–12593. doi: 10.3390/ijerph111212582.


* Zdolec, N., Dobranić, V., and Filipović, I. (2012a). "Occurrence of resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci in meat and dairy products," in *Zbornik radova, 5. hrvatski veterinarski kongres*, ed I. Harapin (Zagreb: Veterinarski fakultet u Zagrebu, Hrvatska veterinarska komora), 71–76.


* Zdolec, N., Dobranić, V., Filipović, I., and Marcincakova, D. (2012b). Antimicrobial resistance of coagulase-negative staphylococci isolated from spontaneously fermented wild boar sausages. *Folia Vet.* 56(Suppl. 1), 60–62.


* Zdolec, N., Dobranić, V., Horvatić, A., and Vučinić, S. (2013a). Selection and application of autochthonous functional starter cultures in traditional Croatian fermented sausages. Int. Food Res. J. 20, 1–6.


* Zdolec, N., Račić, I., Vujnović, A., Zdelar-Tuk, M., Matanović, K., Filipović, I., et al. (2013b). Antimicrobial resistance of coagulase-negative staphylococci isolated from spontaneously fermented sausages. Food Technol. Biotechnol. 51, 240–246.


* Zhang, K., McClure, J., Elsayed, S., Louie, T., and Conly, J. M. (2008). Novel multiplex PCR assay for simultaneous identification of community-associated methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* strains USA300 and USA400 and detection of mecA and Panton-Valentine leukocidin genes, with discrimination of *Staphylococcus aureus* from coagulase-negative staphylococci. J. Clin. Microbiol. 46, 1118–1122. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01309-07.


* Zhang, K., Sparling, J., Chow, B. L., Elsayed, S., Hussain, Z., Church, D. L., et al. (2004). New quadriplex PCR assay for detection of methicillin and mupirocin resistance and simultaneous discrimination of *Staphylococcus aureus* from coagulase-negative staphylococci. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 4947–4955. doi: 10.1128/JCM.42.11.4947-4955.2004.