# Antimicrobial Resistance, Biofilm Formation and *mecA* Characterization of Methicillin-Susceptible *S. aureus* and Non-*S. aureus* of Beef Meat Origin in Egypt

**Authors:** Kamelia M. Osman, Aziza M. Amer, Jihan M. Badr, Nashwa M. Helmy, Rehab A. Elhelw, Ahmed Orabi, Magdy Bakry and Aalaa S. A. Saad 

**Affiliations:**

* Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt 


* Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt 


* Department of Poultry Diseases, Animal Health Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt 


* Departments of Biotechnology, Animal Health Research Institute, Giza, Egypt 


* Department of Microbiology, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt 



---

## Abstract

Methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA) have been found in various farm animal species throughout the world. Yet, methicillin-susceptible *S. aureus* (MSSA), methicillin-susceptible non-*S. aureus* (MS-NSA), and methicillin-resistant non-*S. aureus* (MR-NSA) were not investigated. Therefore, we pursued to determine the diversity in their phenotypic virulence assay, phenotypic antimicrobial resistance profile, and molecular characterization in one of the food chains in Egypt. Samples were collected during 2013 from beef meat at retail. Twenty-seven isolates comprising five species (*S. hyicus*, *S. aureus*, *S. schleiferi* subsp. *coagulans*, *S. intermedius*, and *S. lentus*) were characterized for their antibiotic resistance phenotypic profile and antibiotic resistance genes (*mecA*, *cfr*, *gyrA*, *gyrB*, and *grlA*). Out of the 27 *Staphylococcus* isolates only one isolate was resistant to the 12 antibiotics representing nine classes. Raw beef meat sold across the Great Cairo zone contains 66.7% of MRS, with the highest prevalence reported in *S. aureus* (66.7%), while the MRS non-*S. aureus* strains constituted 66.7%, from which *S. hyicus* (60%), *S. intermedius* (33.3%), *S. schleiferi* subsp. *coagulans* (100%), and *S. lentus* (100%) were MRS . Seven *S. aureus*, six *S. hyicus*, four *S. schleiferi* subsp. *coagulans*, three *S. intermedius*, and one *S. lentus* isolates, although being resistant to oxacillin, yet 11/27 (40.7%) carried the *mecA* gene . At the same time, the *cfr* gene was present in 2 of the nine *S. aureus* isolates, and totally undetectable in *S. hyicus*, *S. schleiferi* subsp. *coagulans*, *S. intermedius*, and *S. lentus* . Although global researches largely focused on MRSA and MR-NSA in animals on pigs, the analysis of our results stipulates that buffaloes and cattle could be MRSA dispersers and that this theme is not specific to pigs. Detection of MSSA virulence determinants is a must, as although oxacillin resistance may be absent yet, the MSSA may carry the virulence determinants which could be a source of perilous *S. aureus* for the human community.

**Keywords:** methicillin-resistant-susceptible *S. aureus*, methicillin-resistant-susceptible non-*S. aureus*, beef meat, antibiotic resistance genes, biofilm.

---

## Introduction

In Egypt, since more than three millennia dating from the Eighteenth Dynasty chronology, domestic cattle are incorporated with all types of agricultural activities in addition to their provision of meat, internal organs, milk, cheese, ghee, skin, bone, manure, horns, and tendons. Antimicrobial agents are widely spread and intensively used in the food production systems. The aftermath of this operation varies considerably globally as a result of the interaction between human and animal demography, farming systems, contaminated water sources, socio-economic strategies, and nation and worldwide trade. Although antibiotic use in food animals has been concealed from the public scene, antibiotic application in meat-producing animals has impacted public health and has left no room for confusion after being scientifically documented.

In 2010, the FDA announced that 28.7 million pounds of antibiotics, which comprises 80% of the total amount of antibiotics utilized in the USA, were being poured down in the animal production industry, and that currently, two million people are annually sickened by resistant bacterial infections and that 23,000 die annually according to the CDC. Eventually, besides tracing the use of antibiotics, the effectual monitoring of antimicrobial resistance is the linchpin of any national and international successful achievement in their control policy.

*Staphylococcus aureus* is a hazard because of its detrimental effects on animal health and its capacity for transmission from animals to humans and vice-versa. The isolation universality of multidrug-resistant staphylococci from meat samples has been perceived by several researchers. This should be taken seriously, especially when findings document that close to 50 percent of meat samples tested from U.S. grocery stores are contaminated with the bacteria *S. aureus* and resistant to at least three classes of antibiotics .

Methicillin-resistant strains of *S. aureus* (MRSA) are notorious for their relation to food contamination and potential transmission to humans . Also, the high prevalence of MR-CNS found in livestock production becomes a relevant consternation in view of the dispersing potentiality of *mecA* to MRSA as several coagulase-negative staphylococcus (CNS) species, which are also non-*S. aureus* (NSA), can serve as reservoirs for *mecA* .

Although CNS have emerged as important pathogens, little is known about the virulence factors of these bacteria. The most important virulence factor of CNS is assumed to be the capacity for biofilm formation. Testing for biofilm production could be a useful marker for the pathogenicity of CNS.

In general, we have not come across any investigations involving biofilm formation, and the antibiotic-resistant genes *mecA*, *cfr*, *gyrA*, *gyrB*, and *grlA* in MRSA in beef meat and in methicillin-resistant non-*S. aureus* (MR-NSA) . Thereby, we aimed an endeavor to identify one of the main hazardous threats to public health, *Staphylococcus* species, to determine the generality of contamination of beef meat in the Egyptian market, the rate of biofilm producers, their carriage to antibiotic-resistant genes, and their consequence as a public health hazard .

---

## Materials and Methods

### Sample Collection

During the year 2013, 100 samples of retail whole beef were collected from several butchers and marts in the Great Cairo zone. Each sample weighing at least 500 g was aseptically collected with the minimum of cross-contamination and immediately conveyed to the laboratory to be microbiologically examined.

### Isolation and Identification

To 50 g of meat samples, 100 ml of phosphate-buffered saline was added in a sterile plastic bag which was vigorously shaken for 2 min to remove bacteria. Then 1 ml of each rinsate was used for isolation and detection of *Staphylococcus* isolates by the Double Enrichment method. The isolates were used for further culture to be consequently biochemically characterized as *S. aureus* () and non-*S. aureus* (). A sub-culture of the 27 isolates was stored at  in tryptic soy broth and fetal calf serum containing 2% yeast extract () to be revitalized for phenotypic virulence assay, phenotypic antimicrobial resistance profile, and molecular characterization.

### Phenotypic Virulence Assays

For the 27 isolated staphylococci, four virulence factors were evaluated (alpha, beta, and delta hemolysins, cytotoxicity, and biofilm formation) using phenotypic tests.

**Hemolysis Pattern on Blood Agar:** The 27 tested isolates were subcultured onto 5% defibrinated sheep and rabbit blood at  for 24 h. The type of hemolysis was recorded as -, -, and double (). Some *S. aureus* strains proved the presence of CAMP-like factor, a special hemolysin, the activity of which is revealed by streaking the bacterial studied strain on 5% sheep blood agar, at 8 mm distance perpendicularly on the -hemolytic *S. aureus* ATCC 25923 reference strain.

**Cytotoxicity Assay:** The cytotoxicity assay was carried out using Vero (African green monkey kidney) cells in 96-well microtiter trays. Suspensions of each of the 27 staphylococcal strains were adjusted to 0.5 McFarland standard. After incubation, the cytotoxic effect of each staphylococcal strain on the Vero monolayer morphology was microscopically perceived up to 5 days.

**Biofilm Formation:** Biofilm formation assay was determined by the Christensen's tube method and the Congo red agar assay (CRA). The biofilm-producer ATCC 25923 and the biofilm negative ATCC 12228 were used as reference strains.

* 
**Congo Red Agar (CRA):** Strains were cultured on CRA plates composed of brain heart infusion broth (BHI), Congo red, sucrose, and agar. Production of black colonies with a dry crystalline consistency indicated slime production, while red colonies indicated non-slime-producing strains .


* 
**Tube Method:** A qualitative assessment of biofilm formation was determined by tube assay. Isolates were grown in MHB for 24 h at , washed, and stained with 0.1% crystal violet . Biofilm formation was considered positive when a visible film lined the wall and bottom of the tube.



### Phenotypic Antibiotic Resistance Profile

Resistance of the 27 isolated staphylococci to 12 specific antibiotics was validated by the disk diffusion method according to CLSI (2012) procedures. Antimicrobials on the WHO's critically important antimicrobials list were selected. The antibiotic discs represented nine classes of antibiotics: ampicillin-sulbactam, methicillin, penicillin, oxacillin, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, gentamycin, erythromycin, sulphamethoxazole/trimethoprim, tetracycline, and vancomycin . *S. aureus* ATCC 29213 (-lactamase positive) and *S. aureus* ATCC 25923 (-lactamase negative) were used as quality control.

### DNA Extraction and PCR

Bacterial DNA from the 27 staphylococci was isolated using the boiling protocol. The isolates were confirmed molecularly to identify *mecA*. Additionally, genes responsible for quinolone resistance (*gyrA*, *gyrB*, and *grlA*) and the *cfr* gene (conferring resistance to five antibiotic classes) were amplified.

Table 1: Antimicrobial resistance genes targets, primers and nucleotide sequences 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Gene designation</th>
<th>Oligonucleotide sequences ()</th>
<th>Amplicon size (bp)</th>
<th>PCR conditions</th>
<th>References</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><em>mecA</em></td>
<td>F: GTAGAAATGACTGAACGTCCGATAA



R: CCAATTCCACATTGTTTCGGTCTAA</td>
<td>310</td>
<td>Initial denaturation: 95°C for 1 min



Amplification (30 cycles of)



Denaturation: 95°C for 30 s



Annealing: 50°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 60 s



Final extension: 72°C for 4 min</td>
<td>Spanu et al., 2004</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>gyrA</em></td>
<td>F: ATGGCTGAATTACCTCAATC



R: CATCATAGTTATCGATGAAATC</td>
<td>399</td>
<td>Initial denaturation: 95°C for 1 min



Amplification (30 cycles of)



Denaturation: 95°C for 30 s



Annealing: 55°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 60 s



Final extension: 72°C for 4 min</td>
<td>Dubin et al., 1999</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>grlA</em></td>
<td>F: AATACGTATGATAAGAATTTCCG



R: GTTGTGTCATCATAGTTTGG</td>
<td>429</td>
<td>Same as <em>gyrA</em></td>
<td>Dubin et al., 1999</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>gyrB</em></td>
<td>F: CAGCGTTAGATGTAGCAAGC



R: CCGATTCCTGTACCAAATGC</td>
<td>250</td>
<td>Same as <em>gyrA</em></td>
<td>Linde et al. 2001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>cfr</em></td>
<td>F: TGAAGTATAAAGCAGGTTGGGAGTCA



R: ACCATATAATTGACCACAAGCAGC</td>
<td>746</td>
<td>Initial denaturation: 94°C for 1 min



Amplification (34 cycles of)



Denaturation: 94°C for 1 min



Annealing: 48°C for 30 s



Extension: 72°C for 3 min



Final extension: 72°C for 7 min</td>
<td>Kehrenberg and Schwarz, 2006</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

---

## Results

### Identification of Staphylococci

We identified 27 staphylococcal isolates belonging to five different staphylococcal species. These included *S. hyicus* (, 37%), *S. aureus* (, 33.3%), *S. schleiferi* subsp. *coagulans* (, 14.8%), *S. intermedius* (, 11.1%), and *S. lentus* (, 3.7%) .

### Phenotypic Virulence Assays

**Hemolysin Production:** In the strains showing hemolytic activity, 66.7% were demonstrated to be -hemolytic, 22.2% were -hemolytic, and 10.1% were -hemolytic.
**Cytotoxicity Assay:** All of the 27 *Staphylococcus* isolates were cytotoxic to Vero cells.
**Biofilm Producing Phenotype:** We found a highly resistant pattern among biofilm producers in comparison with non-biofilm producers. Among the 7/9 vancomycin-resistant *S. aureus* isolates, they were also biofilm producers (77.8%) . Generally, the 20 vancomycin-resistant *S. aureus* and non-*S. aureus* species were also biofilm producers. The affinity of the 27 *Staphylococcus* species to form a biofilm was found to be in favor of the glass surface by 88.9% (24/27).

### Table 2: Virulence factors assay of the Staphylococcus spp. 

Isolates 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="3">Staphylococcus spp.</th>
<th rowspan="3"> isolates</th>
<th colspan="3">Hemolysis, Number of isolates showing</th>
<th colspan="2">Cytotoxic assay, Number of isolates showing</th>
<th colspan="4">Assessment of Biofilm formation</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2">Cell lysis</th>
<th rowspan="2">Cell rounding</th>
<th colspan="2">CR, Number of isolates showing</th>
<th colspan="2">CTM, Number of isolates showing</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Slime -</th>
<th>Slime +</th>
<th>Positive for biofilm production</th>
<th>Negative for biofilm production</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><em>S. aureus</em></td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. hyicus</em></td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. intermedius</em></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. schleiferi</em> subsp. <em>coagulans</em></td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. lentus</em></td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Antibiotic Resistance Phenotypes

The 27 *Staphylococcus* species were resistant to the 12 antibiotics with variable degrees: ampicillin-sulbactam (14.8%), chloramphenicol (29.6%), erythromycin (48.1%), ciprofloxacin (59.3%), methicillin (63%), tetracycline (66.7%), vancomycin (74.1%), oxacillin (77.8%), penicillin (92.6%), clindamycin (96.3%), gentamycin (96.3%), and sulphamethoxazole/trimethoprim (100%). Out of the 27 isolates, only one isolate (*S. aureus*) was resistant to the 12 antibiotics representing nine classes .

Table 3: Results of antimicrobial resistance tests by disk diffusion method for Staphylococcus species 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Antimicrobial list (2012)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Antibiotic disc</th>
<th rowspan="2">Concentration</th>
<th colspan="5">Bacterial strains (Zone diameter values in mm)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th><em>S. aureus</em> ()</th>
<th><em>S. hyicus</em> ()</th>
<th><em>S. intermedius</em> ()</th>
<th><em>S. schleiferi</em> subsp. <em>coagulans</em> ()</th>
<th><em>S. lentus</em> ()</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>PENICILLINS</td>
<td>Penicillin</td>
<td>10 IU</td>
<td>20 (R, 9/9)</td>
<td>20 (R, 8/10)</td>
<td>20 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>21 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>21 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Ampicillin-sulbactam</td>
<td>20 g</td>
<td>14 (R, 2/9)</td>
<td>20 (R, 0/10)</td>
<td>21 (R, 0/3)</td>
<td>13 (R, 1/4)</td>
<td>15 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Methicillin</td>
<td>5 g</td>
<td>13 (R, 6/9)</td>
<td>14 (R, 5/10)</td>
<td>14 (R, 1/3)</td>
<td>13 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>15 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Oxacillin</td>
<td>1 g</td>
<td>15 (R, 7/9)</td>
<td>17 (R, 6/10)</td>
<td>16 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>16 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>18 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>PHENICOLS</td>
<td>Chloramphenicol</td>
<td>30 g</td>
<td>10 (R, 4/9)</td>
<td>11 (R, 1/10)</td>
<td>11 (R, 1/3)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/4)</td>
<td>21 (R, 0/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FLUOROQUINOLONES</td>
<td>Ciprofloxacin</td>
<td>5 g</td>
<td>11 (R, 8/9)</td>
<td>11 (R, 4/10)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/3)</td>
<td>12 (R, 1/4)</td>
<td>12 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LINCOSAMIDES</td>
<td>Clindamycin</td>
<td>2 g</td>
<td>10 (R, 9/9)</td>
<td>10 (R, 9/10)</td>
<td>12 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>10 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>12 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>MACROLIDES</td>
<td>Erythromycin</td>
<td>15 g</td>
<td>10 (R, 7/9)</td>
<td>11 (R, 1/10)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/3)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/4)</td>
<td>12 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>AMINOGLYCOSIDES</td>
<td>Gentamycin</td>
<td>10 g</td>
<td>8 (R, 9/9)</td>
<td>9 (R, 9/10)</td>
<td>8 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>8 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>10 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>SULPHONAMIDES</td>
<td>Sulfamethoxazole/ Trimethoprim</td>
<td>25 g</td>
<td>7 (R, 9/9)</td>
<td>7 (R, 10/10)</td>
<td>7 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>8 (R, 4/4)</td>
<td>8 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TETRACYCLINES</td>
<td>Tetracycline</td>
<td>30 g</td>
<td>10 (R, 7/9)</td>
<td>11 (R, 6/10)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/3)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/4)</td>
<td>10 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>GLYCOPEPTIDES</td>
<td>Vancomycin</td>
<td>30 g</td>
<td>10 (R, 7/9)</td>
<td>12 (R, 7/10)</td>
<td>10 (R, 3/3)</td>
<td>11 (R, 2/4)</td>
<td>10 (R, 1/1)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Table 4: Multidrug resistance patterns among MRSA isolates from local beef retail meat 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Number of resistant Antibiotics</th>
<th>Antibiotics</th>
<th>Number of species</th>
<th>Total number of species (27)</th>
<th>%</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td>P., VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6</td>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, VA, SXT



CN, E, DA, TE, C, SXT



P, OX, CN, DA, VA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT



CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1



1



1



2



1</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>22</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7</td>
<td>P, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, CN, DA, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1



1</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, DA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT



P, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1



1



1



1</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>2</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>9</td>
<td>P, OX, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1



2



1</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, C, SXT</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, C, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, VA, C, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1



3



1</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>19</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, C, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3.5</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Antibiotic Resistance Genes

All except for one staphylococcal isolate (*S. lentus*) bore more than two antibiotic-resistant genes, and a noticeable number of these staphylococci (17/27, 63.7%) carried four different antibiotic-resistant genes. 11/27 (40.7%) carried the *mecA* gene. The *cfr* gene was present in 2 of the nine *S. aureus* isolates and totally undetectable in others.

Table 5: Antibiotic resistance phenotype and genotype patterns 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Staphylococcus spp.</th>
<th rowspan="2">Resistance pattern</th>
<th rowspan="2">Number of antibiotics</th>
<th colspan="4">Resistance Genes</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>mecA</th>
<th>gyrA</th>
<th>grlA</th>
<th>gyrB</th>
<th>cfr</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><em>S. aureus</em> ()</td>
<td>P, CN, E, DA, VA, SXT</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, TE, DA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, TE, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td>++</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>++</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. hyicus</em> ()</td>
<td>P, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>CN, E, DA, C, TE, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT



CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, CN, DA, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>6



6



6



6



7



7



8



9



9</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. intermedius</em> ()</td>
<td>P, OX, CN, DA, VA, SXT



P, OX, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, VA, SXT, C, TE, CIP</td>
<td>6



9



11</td>
<td>





+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. schleiferi</em> subsp. <em>coagulans</em> ()</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, CN, DA, SXT, CIP



P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, DA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT



P, OX, MET, CN, E, DA, C, TE, VA, SXT</td>
<td>7



7



10



10</td>
<td>



+



+



+</td>
<td>+







</td>
<td>+







</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. lentus</em> ()</td>
<td>P, OX, MET, SAM, CN, E, DA, TE, VA, SXT, CIP</td>
<td>11</td>
<td></td>
<td>+</td>
<td>+</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total ()</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>11/27</td>
<td>19/27</td>
<td>17/27</td>
<td>7/27</td>
<td>2/27</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Table 6: Prevalence of mecA gene in beef samples () 

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Staphylococcus spp. ( isolates)</th>
<th rowspan="2"> of MRS</th>
<th colspan="2">Presence of mecA gene</th>
<th rowspan="2"> of MSS</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>%</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><em>S. aureus</em> ()</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>55.6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. hyicus</em> ()</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. intermedius</em> ()</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>100</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. schleiferi</em> subsp. <em>coagulans</em> ()</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><em>S. lentus</em> ()</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>68.8</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>11</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

---

## Discussion

Humans are at a risk of being infected with resistant food-borne bacteria via the food chain from reservoir animals. A previous research has suggested that buying meat at any butcher shop or supermarket is an equally likely chance of it being contaminated with drug-resistant bacteria. The WHO has revealed a report on the global serious threat of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacterial pathogens occurring currently in every locality of the world.

A wide dispersion of two categories of resistance has been revealed in the present investigation: 100% of our isolates carried the QRDRs responsible for quinolone resistance genes (*gyrA* and *grlA*) and the *mecA* resistance determinant (40.7%), responsible for the methicillin and oxacillin resistance. The *mecA* determinant has caused severe complications during the treatment of MRSA in humans .

An interesting and fortunate observation was that we detected the gene *cfr* in 22.2% (2/9) of the *S. aureus* isolates, a rate which was lower than the detection rates of food animal samples in previous studies, while the non-*S. aureus* isolates did not carry this gene . The insignificant detection rate found in this study (7.4%) indicated the negligible opportunity of the *cfr* to be spread through contaminated meat with Staphylococci in the local market.

The extensive use of fluoroquinolones (FQs) has led to the springing up of FQ-resistant *S. aureus*, especially among MRSA strains. We recorded a 77.8% resistance in the MRSA to ciprofloxacin.

The most important outcome of our investigation was the alarming finding that most of the MRSA and NSA-MR isolated from retail meat in the Egyptian market were  resistant to clinically important antimicrobials, imposing a severe threat to public health.

---

## Conclusions

To the best of our knowledge, the extent of a similar research topic has not been tackled in Egypt. In addition, the strength of our study lies in the fact that previous researches on *S. aureus* isolated from foodstuffs were merely screened for the *mecA* gene, while in our investigation a selective enrichment of MRSA was adopted to be followed by a PCR technique for the identification for the presence of *mecA* gene. There are no existing programs for surveillance which allows us to recommend a large scale of research to be conducted to cover the whole country.