# Prevalence and Antimicrobial Susceptibility of Salmonella Isolated from a Variety of Raw Meat Sausages in Gaborone (Botswana) Retail Stores

RONALD GAELEKOLWE SAMAXA, MAITSHWARELO IGNATIUS MATSHEKA, $ ^{*} $  SUNUNGUKO WATA MPOLOKA, AND BERHANU ABEGAZ GASHE

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Botswana, Private Bag UB00704, Gaborone, Botswana

MS 11-438: Received 25 September 2011/Accepted 22 November 2011

## ABSTRACT

The objective of the study was to provide baseline data on the prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella in different types of raw meat sausages directly accessible to the consumers in Gaborone, Botswana. A total of 300 raw sausages comprising 79 beef, 78 pork, 72 chicken, and 71 mutton samples were concurrently analyzed for the presence of Salmonella using a conventional culture method and a validated PCR method. The PCR assay results were in full concordance with those of the conventional culture method for the detection of Salmonella. Sixty-five (21.7%) of 300 samples were positive for Salmonella by both the conventional culture method and PCR assay. Even though more chicken samples contained Salmonella than did any other sausage type, the difference in the presence of Salmonella among the four sausages types was not significant. Eleven serotypes were identified, and Salmonella enterica subsp. salamae II was most prevalent in all the sausage types. Beef sausages generally had higher mesophilic bacterial counts than did the other three sausage types. However, higher microbial counts were not reflective of the presence of salmonellae. Susceptibility of the Salmonella enterica serotypes to 20 antimicrobial agents was determined, and Salmonella Muenchen was resistant to the widest array of agents and was mostly isolated from chicken sausages. Regardless of the meat of origin, all 65 Salmonella isolates were resistant to at least four antimicrobial agents: amikacin, gentamicin, cefuroxime, and tombramycin. This resistance profile group was the most common in all four sausage types, comprising 90% of all Salmonella isolates from beef, 71% from pork, 63% from mutton, and 35% from chicken. These results suggest that raw sausages pose a risk of transmitting multidrug-resistant Salmonella isolates to consumers.

Salmonella continues to be a principal worldwide foodborne bacterial pathogen. According to a surveillance report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for 2007, Salmonella was second to norovirus as the most common causal agent for foodborne outbreaks (7). In Botswana, a retrospective study of enteropathogens isolated from stool specimens by the Botswana National Health Laboratory from February 2003 to July 2008 revealed that Salmonella and Shigella were the most common bacterial pathogens responsible for diarrhea (24). Salmonella-induced gastroenteritis remains a significant primary health concern contributing to the overall disease burden in Botswana, where almost a quarter of the population is afflicted with human immunodeficiency virus (18). Infections such as foodborne salmonellosis, which are preventable with proper health care and hygiene practices, must be minimized to enable prudent utilization of health resources.

Meat products are important vehicles for transmission of salmonellae in food. Botswana is a primary beef producer, and meat exported to the European Union by the Botswana Meat Commission is subject to rigorous inspection. However, meat produced by local abattoirs and sold in local retail outlets is not subject to the same stringent regulations (12). In Botswana, virtually every meal includes meat. However, few studies have been conducted on the incidence of Salmonella in meat products consumed locally. In previous studies, salmonellae have been isolated from meat products supplied by local butchers (12, 17) and from abattoir environments (16). Continuous monitoring of Salmonella in food remains important and relevant to mitigate the risk of foodborne salmonellosis. Monitoring should be implemented more regularly and synchronized with the tracking of antimicrobial susceptibilities of strains of this pathogen over time. Information generated from susceptibility studies is of critical importance for informing health care practitioners about the appropriate treatment for Salmonella-induced systemic infections and for evaluating the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry.



Mrema et al. (17) found that of all the meat products evaluated, sausages had the highest likelihood of being contaminated with Salmonella. Sausages are predisposed to cross-contamination during processing from ground meat originating from cuts of different animals and from flavorants, such as spices and herbs. Sausages also are a high risk food because of the manner in which they are prepared before