Nguyen et al. Gut Pathog (2016) 8:39

Page 6 of 9

<div style="text-align: center;">Table 5 Multidrug resistance profiles of 19 Campylobacter jejuni isolates</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; width: max-content;'><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Antibiotic resistance profile</td><td style='text-align: center;'>No. of resistant isolates (%)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY, GEN, STR, CHL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY, STR, CHL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY, GEN, STR</td><td style='text-align: center;'>3 (15.8)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, GEN, STR, CHL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY, STR</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2 (10.5)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY, CHL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, ERY</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2 (10.5)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL, STR</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>TET, CIP, NAL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>5 (26.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>CIP, NAL, ERY, STR, CHL</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>CIP, NAL, STR</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (5.3)</td></tr></table>

TET tetracycline, CIP ciprofloxacin, NAL nalidixic acid, ERY erythromycin, GEN gentamicin, STR streptomycin, CHL chloramphenicol

## Discussion

The antimicrobial susceptibility patterns among Campylobacter isolates originating from chicken in Kenya were analyzed according to the guidelines of CLSI for Enterobacteriaceae which had been guided by previous reports  $ [17, 31–34] $ . Clinical breakpoints for interpretation of MIC values of C. jejuni and C. coli from chicken are available  $ [31, 35] $ . In this study a commercially available broth microdilution assay was used for the determination of MIC values for seven antibiotics. The assay already proved to be suitable in previous investigations  $ [21, 27, 34, 36, 37] $ .

In this study, only 40 out of 58 suspected Campylobacter samples could be re-cultivated. The storage conditions (temperature, microaerophilic atmosphere) using skimmed milk medium were possibly not ideal. However, it had been demonstrated that C. jejuni can survive up to 14 days at 1  $ {}^{\circ} $ C or 2.5 days at 20  $ {}^{\circ} $ C in sterile skimmed milk [38, 39]. Alternative storage of Campylobacter cultures using transport medium (for example Amies medium) or cryovials is recommended for future investigations.

In 53 out of 58 collected samples, Campylobacter DNA was identified by mPCR assay  $ [26] $ . The majority of the cultures proved to be C. jejuni (88.6 %) which is in agreement with previous studies in chicken  $ [6, 7] $ . In 18 DNA extracts of non-viable samples, 3 C. jejuni (16.7 %), one mixed population of C. jejuni/C. coli and 14 C. coli were identified. These findings are in agreement with those of a previous study that found a longer viability of C. jejuni in comparison to C. coli in biological milieu  $ [40] $ . It may be possible that some C. coli isolates had been lost during the shipment period. In summary, C. jejuni was identified much more often than C. coli (64.2 %) by mPCR investigation. In agreement with other studies, the findings highlighted the usefulness of mPCR as a reliable, sensitive, time and cost saving method for identification of thermophilic Campylobacter  $ [26] $ .



The antibiotic susceptibility of 35 Campylobacter isolates from Kenyan chicken was investigated using European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing and epidemiological cut-off values (EUCAST–ECOFFS) $ ^{[16]} $ . A broth microdilution assay was used as a standardized, easy, and reliable method for the determination of MIC of seven antibiotics  $ [17, 31–34] $ . High resistance rates were obtained for ciprofloxacin, nalidixic acid and tetracycline with more than 70 % which is in agreement with a recent European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) report  $ [41] $ . These results are in contrast to those of Brooks et al.  $ [5] $  who reported resistance rates for Campylobacter recovered from humans with diarrhoea in Western Kenya for ciprofloxacin, nalidixic acid and tetracycline with 6, 26 and 18 % in 2006, respectively. The general high rates of resistance in the chicken isolates may be caused by availability and uncontrolled use of antibiotics by small farmers  $ [42] $ .

Resistance to chloramphenicol is remarkable with 25.8 % in this investigation. Use of chloramphenicol is banned in animal breeding in Europe for more than 20 years, but still it is often used in many third world countries [43]. It is easy to obtain antibiotics over-the-counter and other unregulated venues and injudicious use promotes the development of resistance to antimicrobial agents. Resistance to gentamicin in the isolates obtained from chicken was low in this study (25.8 %), but Campylobacter isolated from broilers and turkeys were totally susceptible to gentamicin [37, 41, 44, 45]. Erythromycin resistance rates found in this study correspond to those of similar studies elsewhere [41, 44, 45].

Multidrug resistance was detected in 61.3 % of the Campylobacter isolates. Eleven different combinations were found (Table 5). Frequent, resistance to ciprofloxacin, nalidixic acid and tetracycline was identified (17 out of 19 multidrug resistant isolates) which is in agreement with previous investigation using Vietnamese Campylobacter isolates [45]. However, EFSA [41] reported low level of multidrug resistance in C. jejuni from broilers of the member states of the EU.

The emerging of antibiotic resistance has been attributed to the overuse and misuse of antimicrobial agents in both the developed and developing world. Antibiotics are widely used as growth supplements in livestock and to prevent infections  $ [46] $ . The emerging of multidrug resistance may reflect acquisition of different resistance determinants on the same DNA molecule or single determinants, such as multidrug pumps, that specify efflux activity against different antimicrobial agents  $ [47] $ . The mechanisms of genetic resistance might be chromosomal or plasmid-borne, and represent a combination of endogenous and acquired genes. In general, mechanisms of