Fashae et al. – Salmonella from chickens and humans in Nigeria

J Infect Dev Ctries 2010; 4(8):484-494.

compared to other non-typhoidal Salmonella [38]. Similar trends have been observed elsewhere [7,10].

Epidemic increase in prevalence of S. Typhimurium has recently been linked to circulation of a particular MLST clone, ST313, in sub-Saharan African countries  $ [13] $ ; however, it has not been determined if the S. Typhimurium ST313 clone has spread to Ibadan, Nigeria. A future study will reveal if this is the case or if the isolates belong to the previously described clone of phage type U282  $ [39] $ . Similarly, the clonality of invasive S. Enteritidis also needs to be investigated to determine whether certain clones are responsible for causing bacteraemia compared to those causing mild gastroenteritis. It is also noteworthy that neither S. Enteritidis nor S. Typhimurium was isolated from chickens included in this study, indicating that intensively raised chickens are not reservoirs for invasive serovars in humans. It should be noted, however, that the samples obtained from chickens were collected in 2007, compared to the samples from humans, which were collected from 2004 to 2005. In 2004, S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium were isolated by Orji et al. from poultry droppings and beef  $ [41] $ .

S. Dublin was not reported as an important cause of invasive salmonellosis in some sub-Saharan African countries  $ [9,11,13,15,35-38] $ , but this serovar constitutes an important human pathogen in Upper Volta  $ [42] $ . S. Dublin is host-adapted to cattle and is highly invasive; it is transmitted to humans through beef, cheese, and raw milk  $ [43-45] $ . In many European countries, surveillance shows that S. Dublin is the most commonly isolated serovar from bovine meat, exceeding the level of S. Typhimurium  $ [46] $ . Only a few publications have described S. Dublin in animals from Nigeria and all of them also associate the serovar to cattle  $ [47,48] $ . Cattle farming is a thriving business in Nigeria because beef meat is highly consumed, either in soup dishes or roasted (suya); other products such as raw milk and cheese are heavily consumed in Nigeria without adequate control measures to prevent spread of zoonotic agents to human. It would be interesting to determine the occurrence of S. Dublin among cattle in Nigeria.

The study further reveals that S. Typhi still constitutes a significant public health importance in Ibadan, Nigeria; therefore, appropriate control measures, such as vaccination and food safety measurements, need to be put in place. Overall, the study supports the conclusions of other publications which report that invasive salmonellosis caused by NTS is of greater public health importance than the S. Typhi [9].



Rarely isolated Salmonella serovars such as S. Apapa, S. Mouschaui, S. Jukestown, and S. Oritamerin were observed causing invasive salmonellosis in humans. Severe human salmonellosis caused by those serovars has been previously linked to exposure to reptiles and amphibians  $ [49-54] $ . Several studies have shown that reptiles are reservoirs for Salmonella that are able to affect humans and recently constitute a significant public health problem in many countries due to captive pet reptiles  $ [55-57] $ ; however, the majority of infections in Nigeria are not caused by captive pet reptiles but more likely by household wall lizards. Lizards are found around houses in Nigeria, most commonly in the rural areas and sometimes inside houses, thus constituting a potential health risk. Additionally, snake meat is a special delicacy in some parts of Nigeria, while snakes are revered in other places. It is interesting to note that all the rarely isolated serovars obtained, with the exception of S. Apapa, were isolated from samples at more rural sampling sites, thus suggesting that the sources of infections were associated with reptiles or the environment. Wall geckos have been previously described as a reservoir of Salmonella in Nigeria, constituting a public health problem  $ [58,59] $  that is difficult to control due to the nature of wild animals. Consequently, the potential risk of invasive salmonellosis due to the exposure to reptiles and amphibians should be disseminated to the people at risk in rural areas.

The majority of the human isolates were resistant to ampicillin, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim; high resistance was also observed to chloramphenicol. Multidrug resistance to these old and commonly used antimicrobials is a public health problem  $ [60] $  and could facilitate usage of fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins for empiric treatment. S. Typhimurium was the most resistant of the serovars obtained from human blood samples and exhibited resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and trimethoprim. In many ways, the S. Typhimurium isolates in this study match the resistance profile of the multidrug-resistant invasive S. Typhimurium ST313 clone found in sub-Saharan Africa  $ [13] $ . This hypothesis needs to be further investigated by MLST typing before it is concluded.

It is interesting that all the isolates of S. Typhi were susceptible to all the tested antibiotics,

490