Adelowo et al. – Resistant E. coli from Nigeria

J Infect Dev Ctries 2014; 8(9):1103-1112.

concern as fluoroquinolones were listed by the World Health Organization as critically important antimicrobials for human health  $ [30] $ . Therefore, it seems very important to pay more attention to the spread of resistance through such production systems in the tropical climate, and regulation of antimicrobial usage in production systems with close interaction between human and animal ecosystems such as this, prevalent in the developing world, seems crucial.

Even though we tested for the resistance genes most commonly found in  $ E.\ coli $ , resistance in a number of isolates appeared to be conferred by mechanisms other than those tested in this study. Thus resistance genes investigated in this study could not be detected in two ampicillin-resistant, one sulphamethoxazole-resistant, five chloramphenicol-resistant and eighteen tetracycline-resistant isolates. These isolates may contain known mechanisms not tested for in this study or unknown mechanisms. The large fraction of tetracycline resistant isolates without any of the tested tetracycline resistance genes is unexpected and may be due to geographical differences between this and previous studies on tetracycline resistant  $ E.\ coli $ . The results of this study underscore the importance of routine screening for antibiotic resistance in commensal bacteria from food animal production farms using both phenotypic and genotypic methods. This is very crucial, especially in countries such as Nigeria with limited studies on occurrence of resistance genes in food animal production systems.

In conclusion, data from the present study suggested that commensal  $ E.\ coli $  from the study farms may act as reservoirs of antimicrobial drug resistance genes such as qnrS which may be mobilized into human populations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study of molecular mechanisms of resistance in commensal  $ E.\ coli $  associated with livestock farms in Nigeria. Results should however be interpreted with caution as a limited number of isolates were investigated and a comprehensive history of antibiotic use necessary to make informed decision on the contribution of antibiotic use to the observed resistance is not available. It however pointed attention to the critical need for the regulation of antimicrobial drug usage in livestock production and continuous monitoring of antibiotic resistance in developing countries for public health safety.

## Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Jacob Dyring Jensen and Hanne Mordhorst for excellent technical assistance and the International Union of Microbiological Societies (IUMS), Society for General Microbiology (SGM), UK and UNESCO for a Short term Fellowship to the first author under the UNESCO-IUMS-SGM Short term fellowship.