Table 3. Frequency of and occurrence of Salmonella serovars from human blood samples by sites.

Number and percentages of isolates per serovars



<table><tr><td>Sample site.</td><td>No. samples per sample site</td><td>S. Apapa</td><td>S. Dublin</td><td>S. Enteritidis</td><td>S. Infantis</td><td>S. Jukestown</td><td>S. Monschaui</td><td>S. Ortamerin</td><td>S. Typhi</td><td>S. Typhimurium</td><td>Total no. (%) serovars per sample site</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital A</td><td>204</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>2 (22)</td><td>7 (78)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>9 (23)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital B</td><td>119</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>2 (17)</td><td>3 (25)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (8)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>6 (50)</td><td>12 (31)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital C</td><td>120</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>2 (40)</td><td>2 (40)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (20)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>5 (13)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital D</td><td>102</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>3 (75)</td><td>1 (25)</td><td>4 (10)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital E</td><td>104</td><td>1 (33)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (33)</td><td>1 (33)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>3 (8)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital F</td><td>107</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (50)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (50)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>2 (5)</td></tr><tr><td>Hospital G</td><td>157</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (33)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>2 (67)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>3 (8)</td></tr><tr><td>Diagnostic lab.</td><td>78</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (100)</td><td>0 (0)</td><td>1 (3)</td></tr><tr><td>Total no. (%)</td><td>39 (4)</td><td>1 (3)</td><td>7 (18)</td><td>13 (33)</td><td>1 (3)</td><td>1 (3)</td><td>1 (3)</td><td>1 (3)</td><td>7 (18)</td><td>7 (18)</td><td>39 (100)</td></tr></table>

florfenicol, and cefotaxime. In contrast, we observed a high level of antimicrobial resistance to tetracycline  $ (n = 65; 93\%) $ , ciprofloxacin  $ (n = 61, 87\%) $ , nalidixic acid  $ (n = 57; 81\%) $ , sulfamethoxazole  $ (n = 61; 87\%) $ , and trimethoprim  $ (n = 53; 76\%) $ , respectively (Table 5). None of the chicken isolates showed high levels of resistance to ciprofloxacin  $ \left(\mathrm{MIC} \geq 2 \mu\mathrm{g}/\mathrm{mL}\right) $ ; however, 87%  $ (n = 61) $  of the isolates exhibited reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin. The reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin was observed in all of the following serovars: S. Virchow  $ (n = 50; 100\%) $ , S. Derby  $ (n = 4; 100\%) $ , S. Haifa  $ (n = 2; 100\%) $ , S. Bredeney  $ (n = 1; 100\%) $ , S. Onireke  $ (n = 1; 100\%) $ , S. Mbandaka  $ (n = 2; 33\%) $ , and S. Muenster  $ (n = 1; 20\%) $ , respectively (Table 5). The four isolates of S. Derby were all susceptible to nalidixic acid but exhibited reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin, indicating a plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance phenotype. Antimicrobial susceptibility of the three most commonly isolated serovars revealed that S. Virchow  $ (n = 50) $ , S. Mbandaka  $ (n = 6) $ , and S. Muenster  $ (n = 5) $  were also the serovars with the most resistant susceptibility patterns. Those serovars showed resistance to ten  $ (S. $  Virchow $ , nine  $ (S. $  Muenster $ , and eight  $ (S. $  Mbandaka $ . of the seventeen tested antimicrobials, respectively (Table 5). Six resistance patterns were observed among S. Virchow; most  $ (n = 31; 62\%) $ , were resistant to nalidixic acid, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and trimethoprim, while only 8%  $ (n = 4) $  showed multidrug resistance to seven antimicrobials, namely ampicillin, gentamicin, nalidixic acid, neomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and trimethoprim.

Detection of qnr genes



Four S. Derby isolates from chickens showed reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and were susceptible to nalidixic acid. All four harbored the qnrS1 gene. The qnrS1 positive S. Derby were from farm K (n = 1), farm I (n = 2), and farm F (n = 1).

## Discussion

In this study, the overall positive isolation rate of Salmonella species from human blood samples is comparable with that from Ethiopia (4%) [30] but higher than those from Kenya (1%) [31] and Mozambique (2%) [32]. On the other hand, higher rates have been reported from Congo (7%) [33] and Malawi (6% and 8%) [15,34]. The skewed distribution of 1:0.5 between males and females is difficult to explain, but may be caused by the fact that more males were examined or that the male population has a higher susceptibility to infections.

Our data reveals the relative importance of Salmonella associated with human bacteraemia predominated by S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium in Ibadan, Nigeria. Similar trends have been observed in African countries where S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium are the most common serovars causing human salmonellosis  $ [9,11,13,15,35-40] $ . It is interesting to note that the majority of the S. Enteritidis and S. Dublin were isolated from hospitals A, B, and C, whereas the remaining hospitals found very few. S. Typhimurium was mostly isolated from hospital B. Kariuki et al. found that the main serovars obtained from children with bacteraemia in Kenya were S. Enteritidis (55%) and S. Typhimurium (33%).