1184

BOUNAR-KECHIH ET AL.

(1997; 88%). Resistance to  $ \beta $ -lactams involved ampicillin only; our result was lower than those reported by McKenzie and Nadeau (2006), Al-Bahry et al. (2007), and Dinh Nam Lâm et al. (2000), which were between 36 and 88.89%. Acquired resistance to aminoglycosides is not common in Enterobacteriaceae (Courvalin and Philippon, 1989); the only restraint in our study was resistance to kanamycin, although this antimicrobial agent is not used in poultry. Our result, probably due to the cross resistance with neomycin, was in agreement with those obtained by Brisabois et al. (1997), Millemann (1998), Dinh Nam Lâm et al. (2000), and McKenzie and Nadeau (2006). The susceptibility to polypeptides was confirmed by Aboun (2005); on the other hand, the susceptibility to chloramphenicol was reversed by Brisabois et al. (1997), Dinh Nam Lâm et al. (2000), and Al-Bahry et al. (2007), who noted 91, 25, and 14% resistance rates, respectively. Out of 24 Salmonella Heidelberg strains tested, only 5 were susceptible to all antimicrobials used. The 19 remaining were mostly resistant to nalidixic acid. In Canada, this serotype would be particularly resistant to the third generation cephalosporins (PICRA, 2006). The resistance of Salmonella Enteritidis to furans was confirmed by the results of Espigares et al. (2006). In our study, Salmonella Typhimurium was resistant to quinolones, furans, cyclones, and sulphonamides. This multidrug resistance could facilitate the spread of this serotype and the development of other mechanisms of resistance to other antimicrobial classes. Indeed, in the literature, Salmonella Typhimurium was resistant to several antimicrobial agents with a special surge of resistance to nalidixic acid (Brisabois et al. 1997; Heurtin-Le Corre et al., 1999). Salmonella Hadar, resistant to quinolones and tetracycline, was multiresistant in the study of Espigares et al. (2006).

## Genetic Support of Resistance

The Salmonella strains resistant to nalidixic acid and nitrofurantoines were not transferable, confirming the chromosomal support of these resistances. The majority of resistance markers were transferred; the most common were ampicillin, tetracycline, cotrimoxazole, sulphonamides, and kanamycin. In our study, a plasmid grouping identified the same classes (Com1 and F1me) as described by Chaslus-Dancla (1980) in France and found in a national study on enterobacteria isolated in western Algeria (Barka, 2002). The results obtained by physical analysis of plasmid content of transconjugants implied that the spread of resistance characteristics of studied Salmonella strains is provided by high molecular weight plasmids. This study allowed us to highlight diverse serotypes, with a predominance of Salmonella Heidelberg. The free flow of the same Salmonella serotypes and the dissemination of antimicrobial resistance and plasmid groups, observed in a limited area of study, is an alarming reality. The fight against avian salmonellosis requires the application of control measures at various levels of the production chain. It would also require the development of an effective plan of epidemiological surveillance, and for this, similar and complementary studies must be conducted in Algeria and will include the identification of different phage types and their distribution, monitoring the geographical spread and resistance evolution of identified serotypes, the spread of resistant Salmonella strains from animals to humans, and the identification of resistance genes. The use of different techniques in molecular biology is essential, particularly those based on the analysis of the restriction pattern of plasmids should be generalized.

