TABLE 1 Primers and conditions for PCR of resistance genes



<table><tr><td>Target gene</td><td>Primer name</td><td>Sequence</td><td>Annealing temp (°C)</td><td>PCR amplification product size (bp)</td><td>Reference</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">tet(A)</td><td>tet(A)-f</td><td>5&#x27;-GCTACATCCTGCTTGCCTTC-3&#x27;</td><td>57</td><td>210</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>tet(A)-r</td><td>5&#x27;-CATAGATCGCCGTGAAGAGG-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">tet(B)</td><td>tet(B)-f</td><td>5&#x27;-TTGGTTAGGGGCAAGTTTTG-3&#x27;</td><td>57</td><td>659</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>tet(B)-r</td><td>5&#x27;-GTAATGGGCCAATAACACCG-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">tet(C)</td><td>tet(C)-f</td><td>5&#x27;-CTTGAGAGCCTTCAACCCAG-3&#x27;</td><td>55</td><td>418</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>tet(C)-r</td><td>5&#x27;-ATGTCGTCATCTACCTGCC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">aphA1</td><td>aphA-1a-f</td><td>5&#x27;-AACGTCTTGCTCGAGGCCGCG-3&#x27;</td><td>65</td><td>670</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>aphA-1a-r</td><td>5&#x27;-GGCAAGATCCTGGTATCGGTCTGC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">bla $ _{\text{CMY}} $</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CMY}} $ -f</td><td>5&#x27;-TGGCCGTTGCCGTTATCTAC-3&#x27;</td><td>55</td><td>870</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td>bla $ _{\text{CMY}} $ -r</td><td>5&#x27;-CCCGTTTTATGCACCCATGA-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">bla $ _{\text{IMP}} $</td><td>bla $ _{\text{IMP}} $ -f</td><td>5&#x27;-GAATAGAGTGGATTAATTCTC-3&#x27;</td><td>55</td><td>232</td><td>47</td></tr><tr><td>bla $ _{\text{IMP}} $ -r</td><td>5&#x27;-GGTTTAAYAAAAACACCACC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">bla $ _{\text{OXA}} $</td><td>bla $ _{\text{OXA}} $ -2-f</td><td>5&#x27;-CAAGCCAAAGGCACGATAGTTG-3&#x27;</td><td>56</td><td>561</td><td>47</td></tr><tr><td>bla $ _{\text{OXA}} $ -2-r</td><td>5&#x27;-CTCAACCCATCCTACCCACC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">bla $ _{\text{PSE}} $</td><td>bla $ _{\text{PSE}} $ -f</td><td>5&#x27;-TGCTTCGCAACTATGACTAC-3&#x27;</td><td>55</td><td>438</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td>bla $ _{\text{PSE}} $ -r</td><td>5&#x27;-AGCCTGTGTTTGAGCTAGAT-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $ -f</td><td>5&#x27;-CAGCGGTAAGATCCTTGAGA-3&#x27;</td><td>55</td><td>643</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $ -r</td><td>5&#x27;-ACTCCCCCGTCGTAGATAA-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">catI</td><td>catI-f</td><td>5&#x27;-AGTTGCTCAATGTACCTATAACC-3&#x27;</td><td>50</td><td>547</td><td>48</td></tr><tr><td>catI-r</td><td>5&#x27;-TTGTAATTCATTAAGCATTCTGCC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">floR</td><td>floR-f</td><td>5&#x27;-CGCCGTCATTCCTCACCTTC-3&#x27;</td><td>50</td><td>215</td><td>48</td></tr><tr><td>floR-r</td><td>5&#x27;-GATCACGGGCCACGCTGTGTC-3&#x27;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Statistical analysis. The relation of the presence of transferable elements encoding antimicrobial resistance in coliphages isolated from chicken meat samples to the recovery of phenotypically antimicrobial-resistant E. coli isolates from the same samples was studied for four different antimicrobial substances. For this purpose, information on resistance transfer from all phages (typically, five) per sample was combined; i.e., a sample was considered to carry transferable resistance against an antimicrobial substance if at least one of the phages isolated from this sample was able to transfer the respective resistance. The relation of the presence/absence of resistant E. coli to the presence/absence of phages able to transduce the respective antimicrobial resistance was then assessed by Fisher's exact test. The significance level was established at a P value of <0.05.

TABLE 2 Numbers of chicken meat samples by type of resistant E. coli isolate



<table><tr><td>Antimicrobial resistance $ ^{a} $</td><td>No. of samples</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Cm $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Cm $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Cm $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Amp $ ^{r} $  Cm $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Cm $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Cm $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Cm $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Cm $ ^{r} $  Km $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Km $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Km $ ^{r} $  Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Tet $ ^{r} $</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Sensitive</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>50</td></tr></table>

 $ ^{a} $  Amp $ ^{r} $ , Cm $ ^{r} $ , Km $ ^{r} $ , and Tet $ ^{r} $ , ampicillin, chloramphenicol, kanamycin, and tetracycline resistant, respectively.

## RESULTS

Detection of antimicrobial-resistant E. coli isolates in chicken meat. One or more resistant E. coli isolates whose resistance was determined using antimicrobial susceptibility testing by broth microdilution could be isolated from 47 out of 50 chicken meat samples using selective plating. Most E. coli isolates were resistant to ampicillin (44 of 50 samples), followed by tetracycline (40 of 50 samples). Kanamycin-resistant isolates were found in 22 chicken meat samples, and chloramphenicol-resistant isolates were found in 18. Table 2 shows the numbers of samples with the different types of resistant E. coli isolates. Ampicillin-resistant as well as tetracycline-resistant E. coli strains were found in the most often in the chicken meat samples (n = 12, 24%); this was followed by E. coli isolates resistant to all different antimicrobial tests tested and E. coli isolates resistant to ampicillin, kanamycin, and tetracycline (n = 10 [20%] for each group). Six samples harbored ampicillin-resistant E. coli isolates only. Five samples carried E. coli isolates with resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, as well as tetracycline. Three samples did not harbor any E. coli isolates resistant to the tested antimicrobial substances. One sample each held E. coli strains resistant to tetracycline only; chloramphenicol and tetracycline; chloramphenicol, kanamycin, and tetracycline; and ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and kanamycin.

Resistance-transducing phage isolated from chicken meat. Coliphages were detected in all but one chicken meat sample. The sample with no coliphage did not hold any resistant  $ E.\ coli $  isolates. About 90% of the phages isolated revealed a clear plaque morphology, and 10% produced a cloudy center. Of all phages randomly isolated from chicken meat  $ (n = 243) $ , about a quarter  $ (n = 60) $  were able to transduce one or more of the tested antimicrobial resistances into  $ E.\ coli $  ATCC 13706. Phages able to transduce antimicrobial resistance were isolated from 22 out of a total of 50 chicken meat samples. Phages which transduced kanamycin