Table 7 Phenotypic resistance and resistance determinants found in E. coli isolates in this study



<table><tr><td>Source</td><td>E. coli serotype</td><td>Resistance phenotype</td><td>Resistance genes/class 1 integron</td></tr><tr><td>Poultry</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O1</td><td>STR, TET</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O18</td><td>AMP, CIP, CPD, NAL, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>qnrA, qnrB</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O18</td><td>AMC, AMP, CHL, CIP, CRO, CTX, NAL, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{OXA-1}} $ , qnrA, qnrB</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O78</td><td>AMC, AMP, CAZ, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O119</td><td>AMC, AMP, CAZ, CTX, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-14}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-104}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry meat</td><td>O20</td><td>AMC, AMP, CPD, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{OXA-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry organs (liver)</td><td>O18</td><td>AMC, AMP, CAZ, CHL, CIP, CRO, CTX, ENR, NAL, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-104}} $ , qnrA, qnrB, dfrA1-orf</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry organs (liver)</td><td>O126</td><td>AMP, CTX, STR</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry organs (gizzard)</td><td>O20</td><td>AMC, AMP, STR, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh poultry organs (liver)</td><td>O145</td><td>CAZ, TET</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen poultry meat</td><td>O1</td><td>CTX, NAL, TET</td><td>qnrA, qnrB</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen poultry meat</td><td>O18</td><td>AMC, AMP, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{OXA-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen poultry</td><td>O78</td><td>AMC, AMP, CPD</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Frozen poultry meat</td><td>O146</td><td>AMC, AMP, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen organ poultry</td><td>O78</td><td>AMC, AMP, CAZ, CHL, CIP, CRO, CTX, ENR, NAL, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-14}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $ , qnrA, qnrB, dfrA15</td></tr><tr><td>Beef</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fresh beef meat</td><td>O119</td><td>CPD</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh beef meat</td><td>O158</td><td>CPD, TET</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Fresh beef organs (liver)</td><td>O78</td><td>AMC, AMP, CHL, CIP, CRO, CTX, ENR, NAL, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $ , bla $ _{\text{TEM-104}} $ , qnrA, qnrB, dfrA1, dfrA1-orf</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen beef meat</td><td>O103</td><td>STR, TET</td><td>bla $ _{\text{CTX-M-1}} $</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen beef meat</td><td>O126</td><td>AMC, AMP, CIP, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $ , qnrA, qnrB</td></tr><tr><td>Frozen beef meat</td><td>O158</td><td>AMC, AMP, STR, TET, T/S</td><td>bla $ _{\text{TEM-1}} $</td></tr></table>

AMC amoxycillin–clavulanic acid, AMP ampicillin, CAZ ceftazidime, CPD cefpodoxime, CRO chloramphenicol, CTX cefotaxime, ENR enrofloxacin, NAL nalidixic acid, STR streptomycin, TET tetracycline, T/S trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole

A (qnrA), while 3 (20.0%), 2 (13.3%) and 1 (6.7%) of S. enterica serovars possessed qnrB,  $ bla_{CMY} $  and qnrS genes, respectively.  $ bla_{OXA} $  associated with resistance to ampicillin and cephalothin and  $ bla_{SHV} $  associated with plasmid-mediated ampicillin resistance were not found in any isolate.

In E. coli isolates, 5 of 8 screened resistance-associated genes were detected by PCR (Table 7). Eleven (52.4%) out of 21 isolates harboured  $ bla_{TEM} $  (1 and 104), while  $ bla_{CTX-M} $  (1 and 14) was detected in 9 isolates (42.9%). Seven isolates (33.3%) carried qnrA and qnrB and in three isolates (14.3%)  $ bla_{OXA-1} $  was detected. Genes  $ bla_{CMY} $ ,  $ bla_{SHV} $  and qnrS were not detected in any of the E. coli isolates.

Plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1 and carbapenemase resistance gene blaOXA-23 were not identified neither in S. enterica nor in E. coli isolates using PCR assay.

## I ntegron gene cassettes and DNA sequencing

Class 1 integron was detected in two isolates of S. Typhimurium using PCR (Table 6). The inserted gene cassettes identified three types of antimicrobial resistance genes associated with class 1 integron: dihydrofolate reductase types (dfrA15 and dfrA17) which confer resistance to trimethoprim, and aminoglycoside adenyltransferase type aadA2 that confers resistance to streptomycin and spectinomycin.



Three E. coli isolates of serotypes O18, O78 and O78 were harbouring class 1 integron (Table 7). The inserted gene cassettes identified three types of class 1 integron. The identified antimicrobial resistance genes were dihydrofolate reductase types; dfrA1, dfrA15 and dfrA1-orf which confer resistance to trimethoprim.

All S. enterica and E. coli isolates were negative for class 2 integrons.

## Discussion

Salmonellosis and Salmonella infections considered as critical threats to human and animal health. In this study, the prevalence of S. enterica serovars in chicken and beef meat was 8.3%, which was considerably lower than incidence rates that reported in Ethiopia (12.0% in raw