BioMed Research International

5

<div style="text-align: center;">TABLE 4: Distribution of antimicrobial resistance among Salmonella spp. isolated from food items.</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; width: max-content;'><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Resistant pattern</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Antimicrobial profiles</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Resistant isolates</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Source of food items</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>AMP, F, SXT, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Minced meat</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>AML, AMP, NA, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>KE, CN, SXT, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw meat</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>AML, AMP, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw milk</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>CN, SXT, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>F, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw meat</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>NA, SXT</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Multidrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>SXT, TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Monodrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>SXT</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Monodrug-resistant</td><td style='text-align: center;'>TE</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw meat</td></tr></table>

Note. AML: amoxicillin; AMP: ampicillin; KF: cephalothin; CRO: ceftriaxone; CN: gentamicin; NA: nalidixic acid; F: nitrofurantoin; SXT: sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim; TE: tetracycline.

prevalence of Salmonella in this study is greater than 5% in Thailand [24]. The variations in the prevalence could probably be due to improper handling of meat, personal hygiene of food handlers, improper cleaning of cutting utensils, and possible cross-contamination in butcher shops. Workers can play a significant role in spreading the contamination during retailing and preparation [14, 25]. Recently, Garedew et al. [25] proved that butcher shop premises and utensils sanitation and personnel's hygiene were poor in this study area. There is a risk of Salmonella infection if the meat is improperly cooked and consumed raw, or if there is cross-contamination of Salmonella with other foods that are consumed raw [21]. The study also suggested that overall cross-contamination, environmental contamination, and food handler contamination might be considered as a common source of Salmonella along the food preparation. Salmonella infection can occur via cross-contamination of meat in slaughterhouses, butcher shops, and the kitchen during food preparation. Contaminated raw or undercooked red meats can serve as main vehicles of transmission for Salmonella [11, 25].

In our study, isolated Salmonella spp. in minced meat were 8%, which was comparable with the previous studies done by Nyeleti et al.  $ [10] $  (7.9%) and Zewdu and Cornelius  $ [26] $  (8%) in Ethiopia. However, it was lower than that reported by Molla et al.  $ [12] $  (12.1%) and Ejeta et al.  $ [13] $  (14.4%). This prevalence difference might be due to variations of the methods used for traditional minced meat preparation for human consumption in the different geographical locations of the country. This is possibly due to the fact that minced meat is a combination of red meat parts from different sources that are eventually ground together  $ [13] $ , which could further magnify Salmonella contamination. This observation can be correlated to cross-contamination during handling and grinding of minced meat. In Ethiopia, traditionally prepared minced meat is often eaten raw or after minimal cooking, and it may be the potential source of Salmonella infection for the public in the country. In this study, only one burger sample was contaminated by Salmonella spp. The reason might be due to improperly cooked meat or poor personal hygiene of food handlers or inadequate cleaning of utensils and equipment or cross-contamination with other products like vegetables and fruits. Tomatoes have been indicated as a common food product involved in many Salmonella outbreaks  $ [27] $ . On the other hand, an irregular water supply to most of the mass catering establishments in this study area made washing practices more difficult and, consequently, washing utensils and knives was infrequently practiced  $ [25] $ .



In the category of raw eggs, we recorded a contamination rate of 18%. Various contamination levels were reported by numerous studies worldwide: 8% from chicken eggs in Dhaka city [28] and 24% in Nigeria [29]. Conversely, the present finding was higher than 0.3% in Dhaka [30]. Salmonella prevalence from eggs in this study might be explained by environmental contamination during storage and transportation and ineffective cleaning of eggs. Moreover, the management system in practice could also be the probable reason for the variation of the prevalence. Egg contamination can occur in the infected ovary of the hen and also through egg contact with fecal material or it might be due to contamination of eggs during their supply from chicken owners to wholesale and retail markets. Salmonella detection from raw milk in the present study was comparable with a study conducted in Nigeria [31] and lower than 20% prevalence in Ethiopia [32]. This difference might arise from milking contamination, unclean equipment, and poor hygiene of milk maid and handlers. However, it is higher than the prevalence of 2.1%, which is found in Ethiopia [33]. As indicated by Garedew et al. [14], unclean environmental conditions and poor udder preparation might expose raw milk to bacterial contamination.

No Salmonella was isolated from pasteurized milk, cottage cheese, cream cake, egg sandwich, and pizza samples. Even though some studies reported Salmonella isolation from pasteurized milk in Ethiopia [26], proper pasteurization of the milk, the good sanitary condition of the processing plant, and absence of contamination after pasteurization of milk might be possible factors for negative samples. This finding is also supported by Garedew et al. [14], who explained that by the effectiveness of pasteurization at the processing plant we can minimize milk contamination to a lower level along the path from the cow to the pasteurization plant as well as