## Phenotypic Virulence Assays

For the 27 isolated staphylococci, four virulence factors were evaluated (alpha, beta and delta hemolysins, cytotoxicity, and biofilm formation) using phenotypic tests.

## Hemolysis Pattern on Blood Agar

The 27 tested isolates were subcultured onto 5% defibrinated sheep and rabbit blood (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 24 h according to the procedure of Futagawa-Saito et al. (2006) to obtain isolated colonies. The type of hemolysis was recorded as  $ \alpha- $ ,  $ \beta- $ , and double  $ (\alpha+\beta) $ . After incubation at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 24 h the clear zone around the colonies was registered as positive reaction. Some S. aureus strains proved the presence of CAMP-like factor, a special hemolysin, the activity of which is revealed by streaking the bacterial studied strain on 5% sheep blood agar, at 8 mm distance perpendicularly on the  $ \beta $ -hemolytic S. aureus ATCC 25923 reference strain, and incubating the plate aerobically at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 24 h. The occurrence of synergic  $ \beta $ -hemolysis at the confluence of the two spot areas indicates the presence of CAMP-like factor. The S. aureus (ATCC 25923 and ATCC 49775) and S. intermedius Hajek (ATCC strain 49052) were used as reference strains.

## Cytotoxicity Assay

The cytotoxicity assay was carried out using Vero (African green monkey kidney) cells in 96-well microtiter trays according to the protocol of Tao et al. (1999). Suspensions of each of the 27 staphylococcal strains in distilled water were adjusted to 0.5 McFarland standard. Then, 20  $ \mu $ l of bacterial suspensions were added to 3.5 ml of brain heart infusion broth (BBL, Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems). The tubes were incubated 2 days at 35°C, and thereafter for 2 days at room temperature. After centrifugation of bacterial broth cultures, 20  $ \mu $ l of supernatants were added in triplicate to 180  $ \mu $ l of cell culture medium. After incubation at 37°C, in a humid atmosphere and 5% CO $ _{2} $ , the cytotoxic effect of each staphylococcal strain on the Vero monolayer morphology was microscopically perceived up to 5 days.

## Biofilm Formation

Biofilm formation assay was determined by the Christensen's tube method and the Congo red agar assay (CRA) as proposed by Osman et al. (2015, 2016). The biofilm-producer ATCC 25923 and the biofilm negative ATCC 12228 were used as reference strains.

## Phenotypic Characterization of Slime Production in CRA

This method is based on the characteristic cultural morphology of biofilm-forming bacteria on Congo red medium. The strains were cultured on CRA plates, composed of brain heart infusion broth (BHI) (Oxoid Ltd, Hampshire, England) 37 g/l, 10 g/l Congo red and 50 g/l sucrose and agar No 1 (Oxoid Ltd, Hampshire, England) 10 g/l. The plates were subsequently incubated for 24 h at 37°C and overnight at room temperature. The production of black colonies with a dry crystalline consistency by the organisms was taken to indicate slime production as non-slime-producing strains develop red colonies. ATCC 35982, a non-slime-producing strain (−), ATCC 35983, a moderate slime producing strain (++), and ATCC 35984, a strong slime producing strain (++), served as controls.



## I nvestigation of Biofilm Production by Adherence to Borosilicate Test Tubes

A qualitative assessment of biofilm formation was determined by tube assay. An overnight culture of each of the 27 isolated staphylococci were grown in MHB and incubated for 24 h at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C. The tubes were removed and washed with phosphate buffer saline and dried. Tubes were stained with 0.1% crystal violet for 10 min. Excess stain was removed and tubes were washed with distilled water. Tubes were then dried and observed for biofilm formation. Biofilm formation was considered positive when a visible film lined the wall and bottom of the tube. Ring formation at the liquid-air interface was not indicative of biofilm formation. The scoring for tube method was done according to the results of the control strains. The isolates were classified into three categories: Biofilm formation was considered positive when a visible film lined the wall and the bottom of the tube. The amount of biofilm formed was scored as 1-weak/none, 2-moderate, and 3-high/strong.

## Phenotypic Antibiotic Resistance Profile

Resistance of the 27 isolated staphylococci to 12 specific antibiotics (Table 3) were validated by culturing each isolate on Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) supplemented with 0.5% NaCl and 2% for oxacillin, to obtain a fresh culture, to be determined by the disk diffusion method according to procedures of the CLSI (2012). Antimicrobials on the WHO's critically important antimicrobials list (2012) were selected for testing according to their importance to human and animal health (FAO/WHO/OIE, 2008; WHO, 2009). One loopful of colony material was subcultured in 5 ml Mueller-Hinton broth for an overnight at 35°C, vortexed well and adjusted to obtain a turbidity comparable to that of 0.5 McFarland opacity standard (bioMe'rieux, Marcy 1'Etoile, France). The bacterial suspensions were streaked on MHA plates with a cotton swab and with an antibiotic disc dispenser, the discs were placed on the agar surface, plates were incubated at 37°C, the standard temperature used for antimicrobial susceptibility testing, for 24 h, and the diameter of the inhibition zones was measured. The isolates were classified as sensitive, intermediate and resistant based on the diameter of the clearing zone according to CLSI (2012) guidelines. The antibiotic discs represented nine classes of antibiotics: ampicillin-subbactam, methicillin, penicillin, and oxacillin (Penicillins); chloramphenicol (Chloramphenicols); ciprofloxacin (Florinated quinolones); clindamycin (Lincosamides); gentamycin (Aminoglycosides); erythromycin (Macrolides); sulphamethoxazole (trimethoprim (Sulphonamides)); tetracycline (Tetracyclines); vancomycin (Glycopeptides). S. aureus ATCC 29213 (β-lactamase positive), and S. aureus ATCC 25923 (β-lactamase negative) were used as quality control. Multidrug resistance was reported as a single isolate resistant (intermediate or complete) to 3 or more antimicrobial classes (Waters et al., 2011). Bacteria strains