Received: 21 April 2019 Revised: 12 June 2019 Accepted: 16 June 2019
| |

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1126


O R I G I N A L R E S E A R C H

# **Antimicrobial resistance and genetic diversity of Salmonella** **enterica from eggs**


**Tengfei Xie** | **Gang Wu** | **Xujun He** | **Zengzhe Lai** | **Huatong Zhang** | **Jing Zhao**



Research Center of Plant Pest
Management and Bioenvironmental Health
Technology, Guangdong Eco‐engineering
Polytechnic, Guangzhou, China


**Correspondence**
Jing Zhao, Guangdong Eco‐engineering
Polytechnic, No. 297 Guangshanyi Road,
Guangzhou 510520, China.
[Email: xietengfeixtf@qq.com](mailto:xietengfeixtf@qq.com)


**Funding information**
Quality Engineering Training Base Project
of Guangdong Eco‐engineering Polytechnic,
Grant/Award Number: 2017ZLGC-XJGZS03; Guangdong Forestry Science and
Technology Innovation Project, Grant/
Award Number: 2016KJCX037


**1** | **INTRODUCTION**



**Abstract**

_Salmonella enterica_ is a common foodborne pathogen responsible for major global

health problems such as paratyphoid fever and gastroenteritis. Here, we report the

prevalence, antibiotic resistance phenotypes, serotypes, and molecular subtyping of

_Salmonella_ isolated from eggs in Guangdong, China. Out of 1,000 egg samples, 54

(5.40%) were positive. _S._ Enteritidis made up the largest proportion of samples with

11 serotypes. Antimicrobial susceptibility test indicated that most strains were re
sistant to β‐lactam, aminoglycoside, and tetracycline antibiotics (27.00%–40.00%).

There were 37 STs based on MLST typing. MLST and ERIC‐PCR classified 54 isolates

into three and five clusters, respectively, which revealed the genetic relatedness and

diversity. In conclusion, frequent monitoring of eggs for _Salmonella_, antibiotic resist
ance profiles and genetic diversity is essential for improving food safety.


**K E Y W O R D S**

antibiotic resistance, food safety, molecular typing, _Salmonella_


In recent decades, antimicrobial resistance has emerged and

evolved in many bacterial as the excessive use of antimicrobials in



_Salmonella enterica_ is a major foodborne pathogen that infects

approximately 9 million people worldwide and is responsible for

155,000 deaths annually, causing serious economic losses (Huang

et al., 2016; Li, Ye, et al., 2017). It is well known that this pathogen is

mainly spread by unsafe handling of uncooked animal food products

including egg, chicken, and pork (Gillespie, O'Brien, Adak, Ward, &

Smith, 2005; Wang et al., 2012). As an important foodborne patho
gen in China, _Salmonella_ was responsible for approximately 70%–

80% of foodborne pathogenic outbreaks (Wang, Zheng, & Wang,

2007). Typhoidal _Salmonella_ causes severe and life‐threatening dis
eases, while nontyphoidal _Salmonella_ is associated with self‐limiting

diseases such as gastroenteritis, but still severe systemic infections

occur in infants, the elderly, and immune‐compromised individuals

(Ceyssens, Mattheus, Vanhoof, & Bertrand, 2015).


Tengfei Xie and Gang Wu contributed equally to this work and should be considered
co‐first authors.



human and aquaculture systems (Kang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2013).

The emergence of antimicrobial resistance in _Salmonella_ to antibi
otics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and cotrimoxazole will

further complicate the treatment and management of enteric fever

(Ejaz et al., 2017). Strains that have been detected are resistant to

some clinical first‐line antibiotics used in the treatment of severe

_Salmonella_ infections (Boonkhot, Tadee, & Patchanee, 2015). As an
tibiotic‐resistant bacteria can be directly transmitted through the

food chain or transfer their antimicrobial resistance to human patho
gens by mobile genetic elements, it is important to monitor antibiotic

resistance among _Salmonella_ isolates and control the risk.

Serotyping is a phenotypic characteristic that is a useful epidemi
ological marker for _Salmonella_ . More than 2,600 serotypes have been

reported (Abbott, Ni, & Janda, 2012). The prevalence of _Salmonella_

serovars in different countries also varies over time and regions.

For example, _Salmonella_ Enteritidis is the most common serovar in



[This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium,](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2019 The Authors. _Food Science & Nutrition_ published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

_Food Sci Nutr._ 2019;7:2847–2853. ﻿ [www.foodscience-nutrition.com](http://www.foodscience-nutrition.com) ~~[|]~~ **2847**




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



the United States. Furthermore, some serovars are also more dan
gerous. For example, _S. enterica_ serotype Typhimurium, which can

cause various symptoms include diarrheal disease (Andrews & Ryan,

2015; El‐Tayeb, Ibrahim, Al‐Salamah, Almaary, & Elbadawi, 2017).

Molecular subtyping of _Salmonella_ is effective for epidemiological

investigations of infections and outbreaks. Multilocus sequence

typing (MLST) is a good method based on sequence analysis of

some housekeeping genes. Given its high repeatability in globally

dispersed laboratories, MLST is becoming an important method in

the investigation of various pathogens including _Salmonella_ (Yang

et al., 2015). Researchers have found that many bacteria contain

conserved repetitive intergenic consensus sequences, which have

proven to be useful for subtyping pathogens. As a PCR‐based finger
printing technique, ERIC‐PCR is easy, fast, and relatively cheap (Li,

Liu, Li, Xu, & Zheng, 2017).

As eggs are a popular food and Guangdong is an economic center

in south China with more than 110 million people, it is essential for

us to understand the prevalence of _S. enterica_ in this region. So far,

little is known of the distribution of strains among eggs. The aim of

our study was to determine the antimicrobial resistance, serotype,

and genetic diversity of _S. enterica_ in eggs from Guangdong, China.

The information generated in this study will aid in evaluating the

prevalence and population of _S. enterica_ to ensure egg safety.


**2** | **MATERIALS AND METHODS**


**2.1** | **Sample collection, culture of** _**Salmonella**_


From June 2017 to June 2018, we collected 1,000 egg samples from

farms and markets in Guangdong, China.

Isolation and identification of strains were carried out accord
ing to previous reports (Yang et al., 2015). Briefly, each egg was

disinfected with 75% alcohol, the shell was carefully removed, and

the egg yolks and whites were mixed. Then, 25 g of the sample was

added to 225 ml of buffered peptone broth, and 1 ml of the solu
tion was incubated in 10 ml of selenite cystine broth (SC) at 37°C

and 10 ml of tetrathionate brilliant green broth (TTB) at 42°C for

24 hr. The SC and TTB cultures were streaked onto xylose–lysine–

tergitol 4 (XLT4) selective agar plates and chromogenic _Salmonella_

agar plates (37°C, 24 hr). Presumptive colonies were stabbed into

a triple sugar iron slant and incubated at 37°C for 24 hr. Typical

_Salmonella_ phenotypes were further confirmed with API 20E test

strips (BioMerieux French).


**2.2** | **Antimicrobial susceptibility**


As per the guidelines of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards

Institute (CLSI, 2018), the susceptibility of the _Salmonella_ isolates to

antibiotic was examined by disk diffusion. Briefly, Mueller–Hinton

agar and a panel of 14 antibiotic disks were selected for the re
sistance tests. These antibiotics are commonly used in agriculture

and life. Them can cover among five classes: macrolides (azithro
mycin, AZM, 15 μg; erythromycin, ERY, 15 μg), aminoglycosides



(gentamicin, GEN, 10 μg; kanamycin, KAN, 30 μg; streptomycin, SM,

10 μg), quinolones (ciprofloxacin, CIP, 5 μg; nalidixic acid, NA, 30 μg),

β‐lactams (amoxicillin, AMC, 10 μg; ampicillin, AMP, 10 μg; cepha
zolin, CEP, 30 μg; penicillin, PEN, 10 μg; piperacillin, PIP, 10 μg), and

tetracyclines (minocycline, MIN, 30 μg; tetracycline, TET, 30 μg). The

results were expressed as sensitive (S), intermediate (I), and resistant

(R), following the methodology of the CLSI.


**2.3** | **Serotyping of** _**Salmonella**_ **isolates**


All the _Salmonella_ isolates were serotyped by agglutination tests

on the basis of somatic‐O and H antisera in accordance with the

Kauffmanne–White scheme (Boonkhot et al., 2015).


**2.4** | **Molecular subtyping**


The strains were analyzed by MLST using seven housekeeping genes:

_aroC_, _dnaN_, _hemD_, _hisD_, _purE_, _sucA_, and _thrA_ . The PCR conditions were

taken from the _Salmonella_ [MLST website and database (http://mlst.](http://mlst.warwick.ac.uk/mlst/dbs/Senterica/)

[warwi​ck.ac.uk/mlst/dbs/Sente​rica/; Jolley, Chan, & Maiden, 2004).](http://mlst.warwick.ac.uk/mlst/dbs/Senterica/)

Each reaction mixture included the following (total volume, 25 ml): 2

*PCR Mix (Qiagen), 12.5 μl; 1 μl each primer, dd H2O, 9.5 ml; and DNA

template, 1 μl. The PCR conditions were as follows: 96°C for 5 min;

35 cycles for 96°C for 1 min; 55°C for 1 min; 72°C for 1 min; and final

extension at 72°C for 10 min. The products were sequenced on BGI

instrument. The seven gene sequences were uploaded to the MLST

database for comparison to get allele numbers and define STs. The

MLST evolution tree was built using the Kimura‐2‐parameter in Mega

6.0 (Tamura, Stecher, Peterson, Filipski, & Kumar, 2013).

We used the ERIC‐PCR universal primers (ERIC1: 5‐ATGTAAGCT

CCTGGGGATTCAC‐3 and ERIC2: 5‐AAGTAAGTGACTGGGGTGA

GCG‐3). The PCR reaction consisted of 12.5 μl 2* TaKaRa Taq Mix;

1 μM primers; and 100 ng template DNA. The PCR program was

as follows: denaturation at 95°C, 5 min; 35 cycles of 94°C for 45 s,

52°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 3 min; and then 72°C for 10 min. The

products were separated by electrophoresis (2.0% agarose gels) for

40 min at 90 V. Cluster result analysis used a numerical taxonomy

and multivariate analysis software package, based on Dice's similar
ity coefficient ( _SD_ ) (James Rohlf, 2000).


**3** | **RESULTS**


**3.1** | _**Salmonella**_ **in eggs**


We isolated _Salmonella_ from 54 (5.40%) out of 1,000 eggs. Of these,

38 strains were from farms and 16 were from markets. The strains

were stored at −80°C in trypticase soy broth (20% glycerol). All posi
tive samples and strains information are shown in Table S1.


**3.2** | **Antibiotic susceptibilities**


The _Salmonella_ isolates were classified as sensitive, intermedi
ate, or resistant based on the diameter of inhibition zones around




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



antibiotic disks as specified by the CLSI. Ampicillin (AMP) resist
ance was the most common with 32 (59.26%) resistant strains. As

shown in Table 1, our strains were resistant to β‐lactams antibi
otic, including amoxicillin (37.04%), cephazolin (38.89%), penicillin

(33.33%), and piperacillin (29.63%). Following this, similar levels

of antibiotic resistances were shown by isolates to aminoglyco
sides and tetracyclines antibiotics, such as gentamicin (18.52%),

kanamycin (53.70%), streptomycin (27.78%), minocycline (31.48%),

and tetracycline (42.59%) were similar. Only a few strains were

resistant to macrolides and quinolones antibiotics, for example

azithromycin (9.26%), erythromycin (7.41%), ciprofloxacin (9.26%),

and nalidixic acid (12.96%). Of note, only six isolates were L193 to


TA B LE 1 Antimicrobial resistance
profiles of the _Salmonella_ isolates

**Antimicrobial agents**


Macrolides



any of the tested antibiotics, and most isolates were resistant to

more than three antibiotics (Table S1). In particular, three strains

were resistant to seven antibiotics (SalE4, SalE24, SalE54), and one

was resistant to eight (SalE13).


**3.3** | **Serotypes phenotype**


Somatic ‐O and ‐H antisera agglutination serotyped the 54 _Salmonella_

isolates into 11 different serovars (Figure 1). Their distribution is

as follows: _S._ Agona (3), _S._ Derby (5), _S._ Enteritidis (14), _S._ Give (4),

_S._ Heidelberg (2), _S._ Meleagridis (3), _S._ Pullorum (12), _S._ Rissen (5),

_S._ Senftenberg (3), _S._ Typhimurium(2), and _S._ Weltevreden (1).


_**Salmonella enterica**_ **(** _**n**_ **= 54)**


**No. (%) of R** **No. (%) of I** **No. (%) of S**



Azithromycin (AZM) 5 (9.26) 3 (5.56) 46 (85.18)

Erythromycin (ERY) 4 (7.41) 1 (1.85) 49 (90.74)

Aminoglycosides

Gentamicin (GEN) 10 (18.52) 5 (9.26) 39 (72.22)

Kanamycin (KAN) 29 (53.70) 3 (5.56) 22 (40.74)

Streptomycin (SM) 15 (27.78) 2 (3.70) 37 (68.52)

Quinolones

Ciprofloxacin (CIP) 5 (9.26) 2 (3.70) 47 (87.04)

Nalidixic acid (NA) 7 (12.96) 4 (7.41) 43 (79.63)

β‐lactams

Amoxicillin (AMC) 20 (37.04) 2 (3.70) 32 (59.26)

Ampicillin (AMP) 32 (59.26) 3 (5.56) 19 (35.18)

Cephazolin (CEP) 21 (38.89) 4 (7.41) 29 (53.70)

Penicillin (PEN) 18 (33.33) 2 (3.70) 34 (62.97)

Piperacillin (PIP) 16 (29.63) 5 (9.26) 33 (61.11)

Tetracyclines

Minocycline (MIN) 17 (31.48) 5 (9.26) 32 (59.26)

Tetracycline (TET) 23 (42.59) 1 (1.85) 30 (55.56)


Abbreviations: I, intermediate resistance; R, resistant; S, susceptibility.



FI G U R E 1 Distribution of _Salmonella_
serotypes from egg samples




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



**3.4** | **Molecular diversity patterns**


After the seven housekeeping gene sequences were uploaded,

the alleles were numbered and the isolates were assigned to 37

sequence types (STs) according to the _Salmonella_ database. The

numbers of each MLST locus were _aroC_ : 29, _dnaN_ : 27, _hemD_ : 22,

_hisD_ : 28, _purE_ : 24, _sucA_ : 25, and _thrA_ : 29. A minimum evolution tree

was constructed using the concatenated sequences of each allele,

as shown in Figure 2. The MLST results grouped the _Salmonella_ iso
lates into three clusters. ST3315 (SalE28) formed its own cluster,

which was widely separated from the others on the evolutionary

tree.

The results of ERIC‐PCR analysis of the _Salmonella_ isolates are

shown in Figure 3. We found bands ranging in size from 100 bp to

about 5,000 bp. The ERIC‐PCR patterns revealed that our isolates

could be divided into five clusters (A, B, C, D, and E) with a rela
tive similarity coefficient of 0.65. Analysis of the ERIC‐PCR found

the isolates to be very diverse genetically. Meanwhile, the isolates

belonging to clusters A and B were similar to the cluster in MLST typ
ing, including SalE7, 9, 29, and 37. However, there was no evidence



showing a relationship between source, serotype, and antibiotic

resistance.


**4** | **DISCUSSION**


Eggs were an important host of _S. enterica_ . In the United States

alone, eggs were responsible for 80% of the 371 known _Salmonella_

food poisoning cases from 1985 to 1999. In 2010, more than 2,000

people in the United States contracted food poisoning from consum
ing eggs contaminated with _Salmonella_ . This led to the recall of more

than 550 million eggs and resulted in heavy economic losses (Al,

2004). In China, about 70% of bacterial food poisoning is caused by

_Salmonella_, with eggs and egg products accounting for 90% of these

(Wu, Qin, Shi, & Zheng, 2004). Our data found that 7.6% and 3.2%

of farm and market egg samples were contaminated with _Salmonella_,

respectively. The market eggs may have a lower positive rate due to

stricter access rules. The results were also much lower than contami
nation pork (41.8%) and other meats (Capuano, Mancusi, Capparelli,

Esposito, & Proroga, 2013). For the egg samples, the contamination



FI G U R E 2 Multilocus sequence typing minimum evolution tree of the _Salmonella_ isolates




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||


FI G U R E 3 ERIC‐PCR DNA fingerprint analysis of the _Salmonella_ isolates



rate was similar to that seen in Iran and Shaanxi, China (Badouei,

Ghalejooghi, & Madadgar, 2012; Wang et al., 2012). However, the

data on the prevalence of _Salmonella_ in eggs still show the risk of this

organism infection and can be useful for control of egg consumption

in China.

Resistance to different antibiotics has increasingly been re
ported in bacteria isolated from animals and humans and has be
come an important global issue. In particular, there is widespread

dissemination of antimicrobial‐resistant strains among _S. enterica_

(Hardjo Lugito & Cucunawangsih, 2017; Yang et al., 2015). Our

susceptibility tests revealed the _Salmonella_ isolates obtained from

eggs were highly resistant to β‐lactams antibiotic, especially ampi
cillin. This resistance ratio coincides with many previous reports,

finding that ampicillin resistance was most serious in _Salmonella_

from some Asian countries (Chiou et al., 2014). Resistance to ami
noglycosides and tetracyclines may be related to the use of feed



containing large amounts of these antibiotics in chicken farms.

Resistance to quinolones is also increasing along with prevalence

of the resistance genes (Ben et al., 2017). Our isolates also showed

resistance to other antibiotics including azithromycin (AZM) and

erythromycin (ERY), which is a public health concern as these drugs

are often used to treat human infections. In addition, many of the

strains were multidrug resistant (MDR) with some even being re
sistant to more than seven antibiotics. Wang et al also showed that

84.6% of the _Salmonella_ isolates from Shanghai, China, exhibited

MDR and proved that resistance genes play an important role in

MDR (Wang et al., 2017). Our findings indicate that it is necessary

to continue monitoring the antimicrobial resistance of _Salmonella_

isolates to help determine the appropriate antimicrobial therapy

for patients infected with this pathogen.

_Salmonella enterica_ has a wide variety of serotypes, and their

distribution has strong regional variation. There are differences in




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



the prevalence of _Salmonella_ all over the world, but most common

are _Salmonella_ Enteritidis, _Salmonella_ Typhimurium, and _Salmonella_

Pullorum (Batista et al., 2015). For example, _S._ Senftenberg has

been proved to be the dominant serovar in cooked meat products

in Chinese Henan province (Yu, Jiang, Zhou, Wu, & Wu, 2014). The

various serotypes have different virulence characteristics. Serotype

Enteritidis is mainly transmitted through contaminated meat and egg

products, which is the primary cause of human salmonellosis (Foley

et al., 2011). This serotype was also the most widespread in our study

(Figure 1). Serotype Typhi is defined as often being resistant to some

first‐line recommended antibiotics (Hardjo Lugito & Cucunawangsih,

2017). There are 11 serovars found in our _Salmonella_ isolates. These

serovars have also been frequently isolated from different sources in

China (Gong et al., 2014). _S._ Pullorum, which formed a large propor
tion of the isolates, are similar to strains isolated from gastroenteritis

(Luo, Yi, Yao, Zhu, & Qin, 2017). As _Salmonella_ serovars are closely

related to pathogenicity, it is necessary to monitor changes in their

distribution.

Molecular subtyping is widely used to analyze genetic diversity.

MLST divided the _Salmonella_ isolates into three clonal groups from

different sources, which differed in all seven alleles profiled. We

found that diverse STs mean that the isolates originated from more

than one common ancestor and possess several distantly related

STs. In the database, our STs were first isolated from diverse sources.

For example, ST31, ST39, and ST40 were from pig farms, pig slaugh
terhouses, retail markets, and humans in China (Zheng et al., 2017).

ST533, ST813, and ST640 were from clinics in Ethiopia and France.

Our MLST results were used for analyzing correlations among the

_Salmonella_ strains. ERIC‐PCR fingerprinting has also been used to

confirm epidemiological relationships between various _Salmonella_

isolates (Li, Liu, et al., 2017). In Korea, researchers claimed that ERIC‐

PCR combined with virulence profiling offered a rapid approach to

characterize antimicrobial‐resistant _Salmonella_ (Jin & Lee, 2017). We

did not find a significant association between ERIC‐PCR clusters,

source, and other characteristics. However, isolates in the last two

MLST and ERIC‐PCR were similar. In general, MLST and ERIC‐PCR

are useful as phylogenetic tools for investigations outbreaks of this

pathogen.


**5** | **CONCLUSION**


_Salmonella enterica_ food poisoning due to egg consumption is a

longstanding problem. Our study is the first to comprehensively

analyze the prevalence, antibiotic resistance, serotype, and molecu
lar subtype of strains isolated from Guangdong eggs, which are an

important local food of native. The results showed contamination

ratio of _Salmonella_ was 5.40%. Antibiotic resistance was widespread,

especially for β‐lactam antibiotics. The isolates belonged to multiple

serovars. MLST and ERIC‐PCR typing showed genetic similarity and

diversity within those isolates. These results provide useful informa
tion to improve strategies to control and treat _Salmonella_ infections.



**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**


Our work was supported by Guangdong Forestry Science and

Technology Innovation Project (2016KJCX037) and Quality

Engineering Training Base Project of Guangdong Eco‐engineering

Polytechnic (2017ZLGC‐XJ‐GZS03).


**CONFLICT OF INTEREST**


The authors declare that they do not have any conflict of interest.


**AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS**


Tengfei Xie, Gang Wu are the common first authors, finished

this article experiment and write the article together. Jing Zhao

(Corresponding Author) give the idea and experiments support.

Xujun He, Zengzhe Lai, Huatong Zhang help to finish the experiment

on article.


**ETHICAL STATEMENT**


Ethical Review: This study does not involve any human or animal

testing.


**INFORMED CONSENT**


Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants.


**ORCID**


_Jing Zhao_ [https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2032-4371](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2032-4371)


**REFERENCES**


Abbott, S. L., Ni, F. C., & Janda, J. M. (2012). Increase in extraintestinal
infections caused by _Salmonella enterica_ subspecies II–IV. _Emerging_
_Infectious Diseases_, _18_, 637–639.
Al, M. E. P. E. (2004). _Salmonella Enteritidis_ infections, United States,
1985–1999 – Volume 10, Number 1—January 2004 – Emerging
Infectious Disease journal – CDC. _Emerging Infectious Diseases_, _10_,
1–7.
Andrews, J. R., & Ryan, E. T. (2015). Diagnostics for invasive _Salmonella_
infections: Current challenges and future directions. _Vaccine_, _33_,
[C8–C15. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.vacci​ne.2015.02.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.030)
Badouei, M. A., Ghalejooghi, B. M., & Madadgar, O. (2012). Study on
_Salmonella_ contamination of traditionally produced edible poultry
eggs. _Comparative Clinical Pathology_, _21_ [, 1093–1097. https​://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00580-011-1238-z)
[org/10.1007/s00580-011-1238-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00580-011-1238-z)
Batista, D. F. A., Freitas Neto, O. C., Barrow, P. A., de Oliveira, M. T.,
Almeida, A. M., Ferraudo, A. S., & Berchieri Jr., A. (2015). Identification
and characterization of regions of difference between the Salmonella
Gallinarum biovar Gallinarum and the Salmonella Gallinarum biovar
Pullorum genomes. _Infection Genetics and Evolution_, _30_ [, 74–81. https​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2014.12.007)
[://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2014.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2014.12.007)
Ben, S. R., Abbassi, M. S., García, V., Garcíafierro, R., Fernández, J., Kilani,
H., … Rodicio, M. R. (2017). Antimicrobial drug resistance and genetic properties of _Salmonella enterica_ serotype Enteritidis circulating




|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



in chicken farms in Tunisia. _Journal of Infection and Public Health_, _10_,
855–860.
Boonkhot, P., Tadee, P., & Patchanee, P. (2015). Serodiversity and antimicrobial resistance profiles of detected _Salmonella_ on swine production chain in Chiang Mai and Lamphun, Thailand. _Acta Scientiae_
_Veterinariae_, _43_, 1263.
Capuano, F., Mancusi, A., Capparelli, R., Esposito, S., & Proroga, Y.
T. (2013). Characterization of drug resistance and virulotypes
of _Salmonella_ strains isolated from food and humans. _Foodborne_
_Pathogens and Disease_, _10_, 963–968.
Ceyssens, P. J., Mattheus, W., Vanhoof, R., & Bertrand, S. (2015). Trends
in serotype distribution and antimicrobial susceptibility in _Salmonella_
_enterica_ isolates from humans in Belgium, 2009 to 2013. _Antimicrobial_
_Agents and Chemotherapy_, _59_ [, 544–552. https​://doi.org/10.1128/](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.04203-14)
[AAC.04203-14](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.04203-14)
Chiou, C. S., Lauderdale, T. L., Phung, D. C., Watanabe, H., Kuo, J. C.,
Wang, P. J., … Chen, P. C. (2014). Antimicrobial resistance in _Salmonella_
_enterica_ Serovar Typhi isolates from Bangladesh, Indonesia, Taiwan,
and Vietnam. _Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy_, _58_, 6501–6507.
[https​://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.03608-14](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.03608-14)
Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) (2018). Available from:
[https​://clsi.org/](https://clsi.org/)
Ejaz, S. K., Poddar, C. K., Singh, M. N., Hasan, A. R., Prasad, J., Kumar,
R., … Sinha, R. N. (2017). Antimicrobial susceptibility of _Salmonella_
_enterica_ serovars in a tertiary care hospital in Koshi region (Northern
Bihar), India. _Journal of Evolution of Medical and Dental Sciences_, _6_,
[1808–1811. https​://doi.org/10.14260/​Jemds/​2017/397](https://doi.org/10.14260/Jemds/2017/397)
El‐Tayeb, M. A., Ibrahim, A. S. S., Al‐Salamah, A. A., Almaary, K. S., &
Elbadawi, Y. B. (2017). Prevalence, serotyping and antimicrobials resistance mechanism of _Salmonella enterica_ isolated from clinical and environmental samples in Saudi Arabia. _Brazilian Journal of Microbiology_,
_48_ [, 499–508. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjm.2016.09.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjm.2016.09.021)
Foley, S. L., Nayak, R., Hanning, I. B., Johnson, T. J., Han, J., & Ricke,
S. C. (2011). Population dynamics of _Salmonella enterica_ serotypes in commercial egg and poultry production. _Applied and_
_Environmental Microbiology_, _77_ [, 4273–4279. https​://doi.org/10.1128/](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00598-11)
[AEM.00598-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00598-11)
Gillespie, I. A., O'Brien, S. J., Adak, G. K., Ward, L. R., & Smith, H. R.
(2005). Foodborne general outbreaks of _Salmonella Enteritidis_ phage
type 4 infection, England and Wales, 1992–2002: Where are the
risks? _Epidemiology & Infection_, _133_, 795–801.
Gong, J., Zhang, J., Xu, M., Zhu, C., Yu, Y., Liu, X., … Wang, C. (2014).
Prevalence and fimbrial genotype distribution of poultry _Salmonella_
Isolates in China (2006 to 2012). _Applied and Environmental_
_Microbiology_, _80_ [, 687–693. https​://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03223-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03223-13)
Hardjo Lugito, N. P., & Cucunawangsih (2017). Antimicrobial resistance
of _Salmonella enterica_ Serovars Typhi and Paratyphi isolates from a
general hospital in Karawaci, Tangerang, Indonesia: A five‐year review. _International Journal of Microbiology_, _2017_, 6215136.
Huang, J. Y., Henao, O. L., Griffin, P. M., Vugia, D. J., Cronquist, A. B.,
Hurd, S., … Patrick, M. E. (2016). Infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food and the effect of increasing use of
culture‐independent diagnostic tests on surveillance – Foodborne
Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 10 U.S. Sites, 2012–2015.
_MMWR: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_, _65_ [, 368. https​://doi.](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6514a2)
[org/10.15585/​mmwr.mm6514a2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6514a2)
James Rohlf, F. (2000). _NTSYS‐pc: Numerical taxonomy and multivariate_
_analysis system, version 2.2._ Setauket, NY: Exeter Publishing.
Jin, E. K., & Lee, Y. J. (2017). Molecular characterization of antimicrobial resistant non‐typhoidal _Salmonella_ from poultry industries in
Korea. _Irish Veterinary Journal_, _70_ [, 20. https​://doi.org/10.1186/](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13620-017-0095-8)
[s13620-017-0095-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13620-017-0095-8)
Jolley, K. A., Chan, M.‐S., & Maiden, M. C. (2004). MlstdbNet–distributed
multi‐locus sequence typing (MLST) databases. _BMC Bioinformatics_,
_5_, 86.



Kang, C. H., Shin, Y. J., Kim, W. R., Kim, Y. G., Song, K. C., Oh, E. G., …
So, J. S. (2016). Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Vibrio
parahaemolyticus isolated from oysters in Korea. _Environmental_
_Science and Pollution Research_, _23_ [, 1–9. https​://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-5650-9)
[s11356-015-5650-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-5650-9)
Li, K., Ye, S., Alali, W. Q., Wang, Y., Wang, X., Xia, X., & Yang, B. (2017).
Antimicrobial susceptibility, virulence gene and pulsed‐field gel
electrophoresis profiles of _Salmonella enterica_ serovar Typhimurium
recovered from retail raw chickens, China. _Food Control_, _72_, 36–42.
[https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodc​ont.2016.07.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.07.032)
Li, R., Lai, J., Wang, Y., Liu, S., Li, Y., Liu, K., … Wu, C. (2013). Prevalence
and characterization of _Salmonella_ species isolated from pigs, ducks
and chickens in Sichuan Province, China. _International Journal of_
_Food Microbiology_, _163_, 14–18. [https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoo​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.01.020)
[dmicro.2013.01.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.01.020)
Li, X., Liu, L., Li, Q., Xu, G., & Zheng, J. (2017). _Salmonella_ contamination
in layer farms of different scales in China: Detection and ERIC‐PCR
analysis. _Journal of Poultry Science_, _55_, 1.
Luo, Y., Yi, W., Yao, Y., Zhu, N., & Qin, P. (2017). Characteristic diversity and antimicrobial resistance of _Salmonella_ from gastroenteritis.
_Journal of Infection and Chemotherapy: Official Journal of the Japan_
_Society of Chemotherapy_, _24_, 1.
Tamura, K., Stecher, G., Peterson, D., Filipski, A., & Kumar, S. (2013).
MEGA6: Molecular evolutionary genetics analysis version 6.0.
_Molecular Biology and Evolution_, _30_ [, 2725–2729. https​://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst197)
[org/10.1093/molbe​v/mst197](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst197)
Wang, J., Dong, R., Wang, L., Rui, X., Chen, T., Li, C., … Guo, K. (2012).
Isolation and identification of _Salmonella_ in commercial eggs and detection of virulence island gene. _Food Science_, _33_, 154–158.
Wang, J., Li, Y., Xu, X., Liang, B., Wu, F., Yang, X., … Liu, H. (2017).
Antimicrobial resistance of _Salmonella_ _enterica_ serovar Typhimurium
in Shanghai, China. _Frontiers in Microbiology_, _8_, 1.
Wang, J., Zheng, Z., & Wang, J. (2007). Risk assessment of _Salmonella_ in
animal derived food. _Chinese Journal of Animal Quarantine_, _24_, 23–25.
Wu, B., Qin, C., Shi, Z., & Zheng, Q. (2004). Risk assessment of _Salmonella_
in animal products. _Journal of Dalian University of Technology_, _23_,
226–228.
Yang, X., Huang, J., Wu, Q., Zhang, J., Liu, S., Guo, W., … Yu, S. (2015).
Prevalence, antimicrobial resistance and genetic diversity of
_Salmonella_ isolated from retail ready‐to‐eat foods in China. _Food_
_Control_, _60_ [, 50–56. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodc​ont.2015.07.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2015.07.019)
Yu, T., Jiang, X., Zhou, Q., Wu, J., & Wu, Z. (2014). Antimicrobial resistance, class 1 integrons, and horizontal transfer in _Salmonella_
isolated from retail food in Henan, China. _Journal of Infection in_
_Developing Countries_, _8_ [, 705–711. https​://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.4190](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.4190)
Zheng, H., Hu, Y., Li, Q., Tao, J., Cai, Y., Wang, Y., … Jiao, X. (2017).
Subtyping _Salmonella enterica_ serovar Derby with multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPRs). _Food Control_, _73_ [, 474–484. https​://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.08.051)
[org/10.1016/j.foodc​ont.2016.08.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.08.051)


**SUPPORTING INFORMATION**


Additional supporting information may be found online in the

Supporting Information section at the end of the article.




