Adelowo et al. – Resistant E. coli from Nigeria

J Infect Dev Ctries 2014; 8(9):1103-1112.

warm blooded animals, commensal  $ E.\ coli $  from humans and animals can cause extra intestinal infections and are a potential reservoir of antimicrobial resistance genes [15]. These bacterial strains, especially when they carry mobile genetic elements such as plasmids, transposons and integrons, can play important roles in the dissemination of transmissible resistance genes [16].

Little is known about the factors contributing to the problem of antibiotic resistance in Nigeria. This is partly because there is a dearth of information on the types, quantity and frequency of antibiotics used in farm animal production system in Nigeria. Very little is also known about the antibiotic resistance profile of bacteria (such as  $ E.\ coli $ ) commonly associated with

<div style="text-align: center;">Table 1. Description of study farms</div>


animal production systems in Nigeria despite the growing global concern about the transmission of antibiotic resistant bacteria through the food animal production chain. The few studies that have investigated antibiotic resistance in  $ E.\ coli $  from the poultry production system in Nigeria stopped at phenotypic level without a corresponding investigation of the molecular mechanisms of resistance [17]. Yet such studies are warranted because of the potentials of  $ E.\ coli $  as reservoirs of transferable antibiotic resistance genes that could be disseminated into human populations as a result of the contact with animal wastes. This study therefore investigated antimicrobial susceptibility and molecular mechanisms of resistance in  $ E.\ coli $  isolated from eight poultry


<table border=1 style='margin: auto; width: max-content;'><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Farm/City:</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Age (yrs):</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Description:</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Antimicrobial use:</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Animal population:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Ogbomosho:</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OG1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>15</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Teaching and research farm, poultry, swine and fish operation. Swine and pond not operating at time of study.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2000 birds</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OG2</td><td style='text-align: center;'>6</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Research and demonstration farm, poultry operation.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>750 birds</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OG3</td><td style='text-align: center;'>9</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Poultry operation in a medium density residential area. Farm separated from adjoining building by a brickwall.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2500 birds</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OG4</td><td style='text-align: center;'>unknown</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Integrated poultry, swine and aquaculture operation in a rural agricultural community. Uses poultry waste as feed supplement in pond. Pond operation suspended about 5 months before sample collection.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, doxycycline, chloramphenicol.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1200 birds, 120 pigs</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Ibadan:</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>IB1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>&gt;20</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Teaching and research farm, poultry operation</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2500 birds</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>IB2</td><td style='text-align: center;'>17</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Integrated poultry, swine and aquaculture operation in a rural agricultural community. Swine and fish pond not operating at time of study. This is the only farm in this study that mentioned using enrofloxacin and tylosin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin, tylosin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2500 birds</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Osogbo:</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OS1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>5</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Poultry and swine operation, swine operation relocated due to protests from surrounding residents</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furaltadone, nitrofurantoin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1000 birds</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>OS2</td><td style='text-align: center;'>unknown</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Poultry operation in a rural agricultural community. People living around this farm use water from a well located in the farm for domestic purposes</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, doxycycline, chloramphenicol.</td><td style='text-align: center;'>750 birds</td></tr></table>

-a brief profile, including types of antibiotics used in each of the farms sampled in this study. OG1-OG4, represent the four farms sampled in Ogbomoso, IB1-IB2, represent the two farms sampled in Ibadan, OS1-OS2, represent the two farms sampled in Osogbo

1104