BioMed Research International

3

<div style="text-align: center;">TABLE 1: Salmonella prevalence from animal-origin food items.</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; width: max-content;'><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Sample type</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Number of samples tested</td><td style='text-align: center;'>Number of samples that tested positive (%)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Burger</td><td style='text-align: center;'>35</td><td style='text-align: center;'>1 (2.9)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Cottage cheese</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td><td style='text-align: center;'>0 (0)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Cream cake</td><td style='text-align: center;'>50</td><td style='text-align: center;'>0 (0)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Egg sandwich</td><td style='text-align: center;'>35</td><td style='text-align: center;'>0 (0)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Minced meat</td><td style='text-align: center;'>25</td><td style='text-align: center;'>2 (8)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Pasteurized milk</td><td style='text-align: center;'>45</td><td style='text-align: center;'>0 (0)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Pizza</td><td style='text-align: center;'>24</td><td style='text-align: center;'>0 (0)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw egg</td><td style='text-align: center;'>50</td><td style='text-align: center;'>9 (18)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw meat</td><td style='text-align: center;'>50</td><td style='text-align: center;'>6 (12)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Raw milk</td><td style='text-align: center;'>50</td><td style='text-align: center;'>3 (6)</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center;'>Total</td><td style='text-align: center;'>384</td><td style='text-align: center;'>21 (5.5)</td></tr></table>

test, Simmons' citrate agar, urea agar, lysine iron agar (LIA), and SIM medium and incubated at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 18–48 hours and interpreted with the International Organization for Standardization guidelines [16].

2.6. Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. Phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing on Mueller–Hinton agar (Oxoid) using the agar disc diffusion method  $ [17] $  was conducted to determine the antibiotic-resistant profiles of each isolate. Briefly, isolates were grown in a shaking water bath at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C until obtaining a 0.5 McFarland turbidity standard. The bacterial suspension was then spread over the entire surface of Mueller–Hinton agar plates, and antibiotic disks including amoxicillin (20 mg), ampicillin (10 mg), cephalothin (30 mg), ceftriaxone (30 mg), gentamycin (10 mg), nalidixic acid (30 mg), nitrofurantoin (30 mg), sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (30 mg), and tetracycline (30 mg) were applied on the surface of the medium and incubated at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 18–24 hours. Following incubation, the diameters of the inhibition zone were measured in millimeters and interpreted in accordance with CLSI guidelines  $ [17] $ . Strains were evaluated as susceptible, intermediate, and resistant. An isolate was defined as resistant if it was resistant to one or more of the antimicrobials. Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 was used as a quality control and standard strain.

2.7. Statistical Analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics 17 (SPSS Inc., USA). Descriptive statistics such as frequency, percentage, and/or proportion were applied to compute the collected data from different foods of animal origin and antimicrobial susceptibility test results.

2.8. Ethical Considerations. Institutional permission to perform this study was obtained from the research and the ethical review committee of University of Gondar, Ethiopia. In addition, the research supporting letter was obtained from Gondar city administration and health office, Ethiopia. Confidentiality was ensured through the use of codes in records.

### 3. Result

3.1. Prevalence. In this study, 21 (5.5%) out of 384 samples were found to be positive for Salmonella spp. (Table 1) through standard culture technique. All these isolates obtained from positive samples were confirmed primarily with the help of Salmonella spp. growth and morphological characteristics on selective media and then with biochemical tests (Table S1 in Supplementary Material available online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/4290506). Salmonella isolates were detected from 6 (12%) of the raw meat samples, 2 (8%) of the minced meat samples, 1 (2.9%) of the burger samples, 9 (18%) of the raw eggs, and 3 (6%) of the raw milk samples. However, cottage cheese, cream cake, egg sandwich, pasteurized milk, and pizza test samples were Salmonella negative. Salmonella was recovered more frequently from raw meat and raw eggs than from minced meat and/or raw milk. Among the sample sources, samples examined from the butcher house and retail shops with the prevalence of 13% and 13.3%, respectively, were the most contaminated compared with the others (data not shown).

3.2. Antimicrobial Resistance Profile. The overall proportion of antimicrobial susceptibility test and the results of antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. isolated from raw meat, minced meat, raw eggs, and raw milk are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Of the total 21 Salmonella isolates subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility test using nine different antimicrobials, a total of 10 (47.6%) Salmonella isolates were found to be resistant to one or more than one (multidrug) of the antimicrobials, and 6 (28.6%) isolates showed an intermediate sensitivity to one or more antimicrobials, and 5 (23.8%) isolates were susceptible to all tested antimicrobials. The Salmonella isolate from the burger sample was susceptible to all tested antimicrobial agents. In relation to the total Salmonella isolates tested, 42.6%, 28.6%, and 14.3% were found to be relatively resistant to tetracycline, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and ampicillin, respectively, while 9.5%–19% were intermediately resistant to tetracycline, amoxicillin, ampicillin, cephalothin, and