Adelowo et al. – Resistant E. coli from Nigeria

J Infect Dev Ctries 2014; 8(9):1103-1112.

production farms in Ogbomoso, Ibadan and Osogbo in Southwestern Nigeria. Four of the farms combined swine and/or fish ponds with poultry operations. The farms with aquaculture operations use the wastes generated from the poultry pens as feed supplement in the ponds. Our primary aim is to assess the potential of the poultry production environment in Nigeria as a reservoir of antibiotic resistance genes that can be mobilized into human populations.

## Methodology

## Bacterial strains

Thirty six E. coli isolated from samples of faecal materials, litter, farm soil, water and fish pond sediment collected from the study farms in May and June 2008 were included in the study. The water samples were collected as previously described  $ [18] $  while samples of soil; litter and faecal materials were collected in sterile polythene sample bags as described  $ [6] $ . The eight farms included in the study were selected from Ogbomoso and Ibadan in Oyo State ( $ 8^{\circ}0' $  N  $ 4^{\circ}0' $  E) and Osogbo in Osun State ( $ 7^{\circ}46' $  N  $ 4^{\circ}34' $  E) of Southwestern Nigeria. The farms are those who voluntarily agreed to participate in the study and are described in Table 1. Among the farms, only one has a comprehensive record of drug usage, it was also the only farm that admitted using enrofloxacin. The remaining farms admitted using one or more of furazolidone, furaltadone, nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, neomycin, streptomycin, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, doxycycline, chloramphenicol and erythromycin regularly on the farms for animal health management. The drugs are usually part of formulations used as feed supplements, commonly referred to as “premix” which often contained mixtures of antimicrobials. The farm with combined aquaculture operation suspended aquaculture operations about 5 months before the period of sediment collection from the fish pond.

The organisms were isolated from the samples within 24 hours on MacConkey agar as previously described  $ [6] $  and were identified at the Unit of Antimicrobial Resistance and Molecular Epidemiology, National Food Institute, DTU, Copenhagen, Denmark by streaking on Blood agar, MacConkey agar and CHROMagar orientation Medium (Bencton Dickinson GmBH, Heigelberg, Germany). Thirty-six non-duplicated isolates confirmed as  $ E.\ coli $  were randomly selected from the samples and stored at  $ -80^{\circ}C $  prior to further analysis for Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) determination and molecular characterization.

## Susceptibility testing

The susceptibility of the isolates to antimicrobial agents was tested at the National Food Institute, DTU, Denmark using commercial dehydrated Sensitire panels (Trek Diagnostic Ltd, East Grinstead, UK) containing the antibiotics listed below at the stated test concentrations in mg/L. Amoxicillin (2-32 mg/L) – clavulanate (1-16 mg/L), ampicillin (1-32 mg/L), apramycin (4-32 mg/L), cefotaxime (0.125-4 mg/L), ceftiofuroxacin (0.5-8 mg/L), chloramphenicol (2-64 mg/L), ciprofloxacin (0.015-4 mg/L), colistin (1-16 mg/L), florfenicol (2-64 mg/L), gentamicin (0.5-16 mg/L), nalidixic acid (4-64 mg/L), neomycin (2-32 mg/L), spectinomycin (16-256 mg/L), streptomycin (8-128 mg/L), sulphamethoxazole (64-1024 mg/L), tetracycline (2-32 mg/L) and trimethoprim (1-32 mg/L). Panels were incubated aerobically at  $ 37^{\circ} $ C for 18-20 hours. MIC distributions were determined according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines [19]. The MIC results were interpreted using the European Committee for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) epidemiological cut-off values and E. coli ATCC 25922 was used as a positive control strain.

## Molecular mechanisms of resistance

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of class 1 and 2 integrons and antimicrobial resistance genes were performed as described previously [20]. One to four colonies of the tested isolates on blood agar were suspended in 100μl of TE buffer and lysed as previously described [20]. The lysates were used as template in PCR to detect strA, strB and aadA in streptomycin resistant isolates,  $ bla_{TEM} $  in ampicillin resistant isolates, sul2 and sul3 in sulphamethoxazole resistant isolates,  $ tet(A) $ ,  $ tet(B) $ ,  $ tet(C) $ ,  $ tet(D) $ ,  $ tet(E) $ ,  $ tet(G) $  and  $ tet(39) $  in tetracycline resistant isolates, cmlA, catA1 and floR (primers for floR: Flor-1, 5'-ATGGCAGGCGATATTCATTA-3'; flor-2: 5'-AAACGGGTTGTCACGATCAT-3') in chloramphenicol resistant isolates,  $ acc(3)-IV $  in gentamicin resistant isolates, qnrA, qnrB, qnrC, qnrD, qnrS,  $ aac(6')Ib $  and qepA in isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin ( $ \geq 0.125mg/L $ ) but sensitive to nalidixic acid with MIC  $ \leq 32 $  mg/L [20, 22-25]. The variable regions of Class 1 and Class 2 integrons were amplified and representatives of the different sized amplicons sequenced to characterise their gene contents as described by Peirano et al [21]. The following were used as positive control strains in PCR: E. coli ( $ tet(A) $ ), Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 ( $ tet(G) $ ), E. coli CSH50::Tn10 ( $ tet(B) $ ), E. coli

1105