Osman et al.

ARGs with Staphylococci Chicken Meat

which indicated that the incidence of MRSA was infrequent in poultry meat when compared to the beef and pork meats and with variable prevalences between regions.

Antibiotic resistance patterns of individual pathogens to the drugs used to treat them vary considerably between and within countries. The discrepancies and uncomparable results between researchers, including us, was incriminated by Kluytmans et al. (1995), Chaibenjawong and Foster (2011), Doyle et al. (2011) and Omurtag et al. (2013) to be due to several criteria, such as: (i) sampling and culture methods differed among the studies; (ii) the condition of the meat when being sold is it packed or unpacked in the supermarkets or through the widely spread butcher shops in Great Cairo; (iii) MRSA carriers can contaminate meat during slaughter and processing; (iv) pathogen load on raw meat changes according to species; (v) heat treatment and cross-contamination change the pathogen titre on the meat; (vi) serving frequency and size, and demographic data; (vii) regional differences and social groups dissimilarities are conditions that must be taken into consideration; (viii) infected/colonized food handlers are favorable causes for meat contamination; (ix) under conditions of temperature abuse, MSSA and MRSA cells could multiply on meat; (x) the unjuridical use of antibiotics for animals; (y) different patterns of antibiotic use; (xi) distinct national disease burdens; (xii) disparities in access to first—and second-line treatments; and (xiii) the burden of coinfections.

Eventually, AMR drugs have become a global public health crisis implicating the importance of preventing contamination of food with MRSA, which could have trade consequences and exert coercion to those sovereigntries with un-controlled antimicrobial practices to create and enforce proper danger administration strategies. Therefore, the use of antibiotics for animals and their documentation has become a must to aid in analyzing their use and consequent impact on public health to enact policy changes on the consumption of antibiotics (APUA, 2010b; WHO, 2013).