TABLE 2. PREVALENCE OF COAGULASE-POSITIVE AND COAGULASE-NEGATIVE STAPHYLOCOCCI IN CHICKEN AND BEEF RAW-MEAT SAMPLES



<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Staphylococcus species</td><td rowspan="2">Chicken meat (n=50)</td><td colspan="3">Beef meat (n=50)</td><td rowspan="2">Total (n=100)</td></tr><tr><td>Local (n=27)</td><td>Imported (n=23)</td><td>Total (n=50)</td></tr><tr><td>Coagulase-positive aureus</td><td>3/50 (6%)</td><td>9/27 (33.3%)</td><td>3/23 (13.0%)</td><td>12/50 (23.1%)</td><td>15/100 (15%)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Coagulase-positive non-S. aureus staphylococci (NSA)</td></tr><tr><td>hyicus</td><td>10/50 (20%)</td><td>10/27 (37%)</td><td>6/23 (26.1%)</td><td>16/50 (30.8%)</td><td>26/100 (26%)</td></tr><tr><td>intermedius</td><td>1/50 (2%)</td><td>3/27 (11.1%)</td><td>3/23 (13.0%)</td><td>6/50 (11.5%)</td><td>7/100 (7%)</td></tr><tr><td>schleiferi subsp. coagulans</td><td>—</td><td>4/27 (14.8%)</td><td>—</td><td>4/50 (7.7%)</td><td>4/100 (4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>14/50 (28%)</td><td>26/27 (96.3%)</td><td>12/23 (52.2%)</td><td>38/50 (76%)</td><td>52/100 (52%)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Coagulase negative non-S. aureus staphylococci (NSA)</td></tr><tr><td>epidermedius</td><td>13/50 (26%)</td><td>—</td><td>1/23 (4.3%)</td><td>1/50 (2.1%)</td><td>14/100 (14%)</td></tr><tr><td>lugdunensis</td><td>15/50 (30%)</td><td>—</td><td>3/23 (13.0%)</td><td>3/50 (6.3%)</td><td>18/100 (18%)</td></tr><tr><td>haemolyticus</td><td>1/50 (2%)</td><td>—</td><td>1/23 (4.3%)</td><td>1/50 (2.1%)</td><td>2/100 (2%)</td></tr><tr><td>hominus</td><td>3/50 (6%)</td><td>—</td><td>1/23 (4.3%)</td><td>1/50 (2.1%)</td><td>4/100 (4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Schleiferi subsp. coagulans</td><td>2/50 (4%)</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>2/100 (2%)</td></tr><tr><td>simulans</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>1/23 (4.3%)</td><td>1/50 (2.1%)</td><td>1/100 (1%)</td></tr><tr><td>cohnii</td><td>1/50 (2%)</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>1/100 (1%)</td></tr><tr><td>lentus</td><td>1/50 (2%)</td><td>1/27 (3.7%)</td><td>—</td><td>1/50 (2%)</td><td>2/100 (2%)</td></tr><tr><td>scuri</td><td>—</td><td>—</td><td>4/23 (17.4%)</td><td>4/50 (8.3%)</td><td>4/100 (4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>36/50 (75%)</td><td>1/27 (3.7%)</td><td>11/23 (47.8%)</td><td>12/50 (25%)</td><td>48/100 (48%)</td></tr></table>

may also be sources of contamination, as well as coughing and sneezing by individuals with respiratory infections (McEntire, 2004). S. aureus contaminations are often associated with institutions such as hospitals, schools, and prisons, where food is often prepared in mass quantities and held until consumption (McEntire, 2004). Lack of sanitation by workers and improper time–temperature combinations during storage can lead to contamination of the product and growth of the microorganism to levels at which toxin is produced (McEntire, 2004).

Podkowik et al. (2012) showed that raw chicken and beef meat are an important source of CNS and that they received increasing attention due to their potential role in the dissemination of antibiotic-resistance markers in the community and imply food-safety hazards. The antimicrobial resistance profile of the tested CPS and CNS isolates to different antibiotics is recorded in Table 1. All investigated CPS and CNS isolates were resistant to at least one antibiotic. A high overall resistance to antibiotics was observed, again possibly from using antibiotics as growth promoters in animal feed (Wise, 2007), especially those commonly used for both human and animal care, which should consequently be avoided. Antimicrobial resistance was mainly against penicillin (94%), clindamycin (90%), and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (82%). Vancomycin-resistant S. aureus showed intermediate resistance (51%), which might indicate the dissemination of vancomycin resistance in the community and imply food-safety hazards (Martins et al., 2013). The percentage of resistance to  $ \beta $ -lactams was variable, with the highest resistance being to penicillin (94%) and lowest to ampicillin-sulbactam (22%). CNS are more resistant than S. aureus and may be a source of  $ \beta $ -lactam resistance genes (de Medeiros et al., 2011).

These findings highlight the high potential risk for consumers in the absence of strict hygienic and preventative measures to avoid the presence of CPS and CNS isolates in foods. Emphasis should be placed on implementing The Codex Alimentarius Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CHPM), which includes the primary international standard for meat hygiene and incorporates a risk-based approach to application of sanitary measures throughout the meat production chain (OIE, 2014). Also, contamination during the distribution and consumption of the final food products must be taken into account. In addition, the potential trade impacts of beef meat garners attention to the multidrug-resistant characteristics of the isolated CPS and CNS and their possible international spread, which poses a threat to public health through their ability to be transferred to humans. Our results show the need for and importance of improving monitoring data and global cooperation in controlling food contamination, raising the sense of urgency to prevent a more threatening drug-resistant bacteria from emerging and unleashing a pandemic. Our findings also provide useful information for public health projects in Egypt, and indicate that the implementation of the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CCFICS) and the OIE Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals and Animal Products publication, which provide guidelines useful to bilateral parties to develop principles and guidelines in this area, has become a must and that food control should cover both export and import.



## Disclosure Statement

No competing financial interests exist.

## References

Achi OK, Madubuike CN. Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Staphylococcus aureus isolated from retail ready-to-eat foods in Nigeria. Res J Microbiol 2007;2:516–523.

Akbar A, Anil KA. Prevalence and antibiogram study of Salmonella and Staphylococcus aureus in poultry meat. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013;3:163–168.