902

N. Bouzidi et al. / Food Research International 45 (2012) 897–904

(Kojima et al., 2009; Schwaiger, Schmied, & Bauer, 2008, 2010), which showed that the levels of antimicrobial resistance in laying hens are relatively low compared to broilers, pigs and, to a lesser extent, cattle (Bywater et al., 2004; De Jong et al., 2009; Persoons et al., 2009). In the current study, seven Salmonella isolates were found to be resistant to tetracycline and streptomycin. Resistance to these antimicrobials is commonly observed among Salmonella isolates and has been reported by several studies in poultry products (Manie, Khan, Brozel, Veith, & Gouws, 1998; Nayak et al., 2004). In the present study, resistance to nalidixic acid was detected in twelve isolates belonging to five serotypes, and resistance to ciprofloxacin was only detected in three isolates of S. Kentucky with  $ MIC \geq 8 \, mg/L $ . The presence of isolates resistant to fluoroquinolones is more worrying, as this class of antimicrobials is often used to treat severe human salmonellosis. To our knowledge, this is the first isolation of ciprofloxacin-resistant S. Kentucky in Algeria, but no investigation has been conducted to identify the source of contamination. This coincides with findings of similar ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates of S. Kentucky isolated by the Pasteur Institute in Paris at the same time and related to travelers returning from northeast and eastern Africa (Le Hello et al., 2010). In poultry, this ciprofloxacin resistant Kentucky clone was isolated from chickens and turkeys in three noncontiguous African countries (Ethiopia, Morocco, and Togo), suggesting that poultry may be an important vehicle for infection by this strain (Le Hello et al., 2010). A possible source of contamination of African poultry could be the aquaculture farms in the North–East or East of Africa, as they use antimicrobial agents intensively. This ciprofloxacin-resistant S. Kentucky clone may have spread to poultry through fish meal feeds originating from these aquaculture farms. In our investigation, the antimicrobial resistance tests revealed a resistance to cephalotin in five isolates from two serotypes, S. Hadar and S. Kentucky. No isolate resistant to third-generation cephalosporin has been isolated, unlike human isolates from these regions (data not shown) that showed a considerable increase in resistance to third-generation cephalosporins in hospitals.

#### 4.3. Risk Indicators associated with the Salmonella status of flocks

In accordance with documented research, we identified six risk indicators with RR values  $ \geq2 $ . None were statistically significant, but we cannot rule out a lack of statistical power due to our restricted sample.

The absence of a fence at the entrance of henhouses appears to influence the Salmonella status of laying-hen flocks. Salmonella was found more frequently on farms where non-essential visitors have easy access to the layer houses (58.3% vs 16.7%). A fence also seems to be effective in protecting the buildings from access by domestic or wild animals. A fence also restricts admittance of persons, especially visitors not on the farming staff, who could be indirect mechanical vectors of the bacteria, as seen in previous studies (Cardinale, Tall, Gueye, Cisse, & Salvat, 2004; Hald, Wedderkopp, & Madsen, 2000; Hunneau-Salaün, Denis, Balaine, & Salvat, 2007).

The absence of disinfection before new pullets were loaded appeared to be a risk indicator and revealed a potential link to Salmonella contamination. Seven out of 13 flocks where no disinfectant was used were found to be Salmonella-positive (53.8% vs 20%). This result might indicate an inadequate cleaning and disinfection procedure. The persistence of Salmonella contamination between two successive flocks housed in the same building was probably a consequence of this ineffective cleaning procedure. Research on broiler chickens (Baggesen, Olsen, & Bisgaard, 1992; Lahellec et al., 1986) has demonstrated that ineffective cleaning and disinfection could be the predominant risk factor of Salmonella contamination.

Salmonella is found more often in layer houses where dead birds are stored on the farm for at least 1 week (80% vs 30.8%). Keeping the dead birds on the farms may increase the number of insects, flies, beetles and pests which can act as a vector for several diseases and pathogenic bacteria. For the farms evaluated in this study, four out of five henhouses where numerous flies were observed inside the layer houses during sampling visits tested positive for Salmonella. This observation underlines the importance of biosecurity measures to protect birds from infections and their dissemination. It is also in agreement with previous studies (Craven et al., 2000; Hoover, Kenney, Amick, & Hypes, 1997; Liljebjelke et al., 2005).



The layer house ventilation system appeared to be a risk indicator for the flock's Salmonella contamination in our study. It may be indirectly an evidence of a potential link between high temperature inside the henhouses, due to the poor ventilation, and the presence of Salmonella. In the current study, 16 henhouses were ventilated naturally by windows and doors, and only two featured a mechanical ventilation system. Of the five henhouses where there were not enough windows and where air renewal was insufficient and the temperature high ( $ >30\ ^{\circ}C $ ), four were contaminated (80% vs 30.8%). The lack of fresh air circulating inside the henhouse leads to high inside temperatures, especially in summer. High temperatures can cause agitation and stress in hens, which can subsequently lead to Salmonella excretion. Stress has already been shown to have an immunosuppressive effect in laying hens (El-Lethey, Huber-Eicher, & Jungi, 2003; Humphrey, 2006), with possible negative consequences on Salmonella shedding.

The observed presence of living or dead rodents inside the henhouses appears to influence the Salmonella contamination of layer flocks in our study (71.4% vs 27.3%). It has been reported that conventional battery cage housing is a more attractive environment for pests because the caged hens cannot move around as much (Carrique-Mas, Marin, Breslin, McLaren, & Davies, 2009). In our study, rodents inside the layer house may be a risk factor because they can act as vectors for Salmonella. The number of flocks studied is too small to confirm this tendency. However, studies carried out on broiler chickens and laying-hen flocks identified rodents as a potential source of Salmonella contamination and persistence in poultry houses (Henzler, Ebel, Sanders, Kradel, & Mason, 1994; Henzler & Opitz, 1992).

The dry cleaning of cages appears to influence the Salmonella contamination of flocks in our study (53.8% vs 20%), and reveals a potential link to Salmonella prevalence in layer houses. It is a well-known fact that the cage systems are not dismantled and are consequently extremely difficult to clean and disinfect because of the restricted access to cage interiors, feeders, egg belts and so forth (Carrique-Mas, Breslin, et al., 2009; Davies & Breslin, 2003). In the current study, the fact that two Salmonella serovars were present in dust samples from cages in the second hen flocks reared in the same layer houses was probably the result of this difficulty in efficiently cleaning the cages.

### 5. Conclusion

The current study provides baseline data on the Salmonella contamination of Algerian laying-hen flocks and some useful information on the presence of Salmonella, antimicrobial resistance and the associated risk factors for laying-hen farms. We showed that eight flocks tested positive for Salmonella among 18 flocks sampled and that layer life stages also affected the prevalence of Salmonella recovered from the seven pooled samples. The results of this study also illustrate that, despite using an extended sampling protocol on flock (3 pooled feces samples, 2 pools of dust and environmental swabs, 2 pools of water and feed samples), the proportion of positive samples remains very low (19/2754). We also revealed the presence of multiple Salmonella serovars, and a small proportion of antibiotic-resistant isolates, which may suggest a moderate use of antibiotics in Algerian laying-hen flocks. Unfortunately, no published data is available regarding the use of antimicrobial on Algerian farms. In