# _Brief Original Article_ **Occurrence of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in retail raw meat products in** **Ethiopia**

Adem Hiko [1], Daniel Asrat [2], Girma Zewde [1]

_1Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Addis Ababa University, P.O.Box 34,_
_Debre Zeit, Ethiopia_
_2Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Addis Ababa University, P.O.Box_
_9086, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia_

**Abstract**
Background: _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 ( _E. coli_ O157:H7) is now recognized as a major cause of diarrhoea, hemorrhagic colitis and
hemolytic-uremic syndrome worldwide. Consumption of raw or undercooked meat of bovine origin has been the most common means of
transmitting this organism.
Methodology: Over a period of 7 months (October 2006 to April 2007), a total of 738 raw meat samples were collected from bovines (n=
250), sheep (n=243) and goat (n=245) and investigated for the presence of _E. coli_ O157: H7. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was
performed using the disk diffusion method.
Results: _E._ _coli_ O157:H7 were isolated from 31 (4.2%) out of 738 meat samples examined. Among meat samples examined, the highest
prevalence (8%) was recorded in beef, followed by lamb and mutton (2.5%) and goat meat (2%). The isolated strains were found to be
susceptible (100%) to amikacin, chloramphenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin, nalidixic acid, norfloxacin, polymyxin B and trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole. Multidrug resistance to three or more drugs was detected in 7/31 (22.6%) strains.
Conclusions: The results of this study revealed the presence of _E. coli_ O157:H7 in retail raw meats reaching consumers, indicating possible
risks of infection to people through the consumption of raw/under-cooked meat or cross-contamination of other food products. Coordinated
actions are needed to reduce or eliminate the risks posed by this organism at various stages in food chain. Multiple drug resistant isolates
detected in the present study may pose a threat to humans and further limit therapeutic options.

**Key Words** : _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7, prevalence, antimicrobial susceptibility, raw meat, Ethiopia

_J Infect Developing Countries_ 2008; 2(5):389-393.

Received 18 April 2008 - Accepted 7 July 2008

Copyright © 2008 Hiko _et al_ . This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

**Introduction** use in VTEC infections is controversial because of the



_Escherichia coli_ ( _E. coli_ ) is a normal part of the
intestinal micro-flora of many healthy animals,
including humans. However, some strains can cause
diseases. Verocytotoxigenic _E. coli_ (VTEC) (also
referred to as Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli_ ), including
serotype O157:H7, are one such group, causing severe,
chronic, and potentially fatal illness such as
hemorrhagic colitis, hemolytic uremic syndrome,
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and, in severe
cases, death, related to their ability to produce one or
more toxins known as verotoxin or Shiga-like toxin [1].
Consumption of raw or undercooked foods of bovine
origin has been the most common means of transmitting
VTEC organisms in sporadic cases and in outbreaks of
VTEC infection [2].

Nevertheless, a variety of other foods have also
been implicated in causing outbreaks [3,4]. Antibiotic



use in VTEC infections is controversial because of the
potential to increase production and secretion of Shiga
toxins [5]. However, increase in antibiotic resistance
has been noted over the last 20 years [6-8]. Outbreaks
of _E. coli_ O157 have been reported in different parts of
the world [9-11].

However, little is known about the prevalence of
this serogroup in Ethiopia, either in humans or in the
animal population or in foods [12]. The present study
was conducted to address the lack of information
pertaining to the prevalence and antibiotic susceptibility
profiles of _E. coli_ O157:H7 in raw meat obtained from
food animals in Ethiopia where raw meat from these
sources is widely consumed.




Hiko _et al._ - _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in retail raw meat products of Ethiopia


**Materials and Methods**
_Ethical considerations_

The research project was approved by the
Academic Commission of the Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.

_Study area_

Over a period of 7 months (October 2006 to April
2007), a prevalence survey of _E. coli_ O157:H7 was
conducted on meat samples obtained from legally
registered butcher shops, municipal abattoirs, and
selected export abattoirs at Debre-Zeit and Modjo
towns, which are allocated at 45 and 70 km,
respectively from the Addis Ababa, the capital city of
the Federal Republic of Ethiopia.

_Sample collection, handling and transport_

A total of 738 raw meat samples were collected
from municipal abattoirs (n=177), export abattoirs
(n=433) and butcher shops (n=128 (Table 1). The meat
samples were from bovines (n=250), sheep (n=243) and
goat (n=245). Of the 738 meat samples, 406 (55%) and
333 (45%) were collected from Debre Zeit and Modjo
Towns, respectively. All the meat samples were readyto-eat fresh and collected aseptically, placed into sterile
containers, and transported to the Microbiology
Laboratory of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Addis Ababa University, located at Debre Zeit. Samples
were transported in ice boxes and analyzed within 6 to
12 hours.

**Table 1.** Meat samples investigated for _E. coli_ O157:H7
obtained from abattoirs and butcher shops, Debre Zeit and
Modjo towns, Ethiopia.



Raw meat type



Meat source
Abattoirs Butcher
Export Municipality shops
no. (%) no. (%) no. (%)



Export Municipality shops
no. (%) no. (%) no. (%)

Beef (n = 250) 40 (16.0) 124 (49.6) 86 (34.4)
Mutton (and/or lamb) (n = 243) 188 (77.4) 35 (14.4) 20 (8.2)
Goat’s meat (n= 245) 205 (84.0) 18 (7.0) 22 (9.0)
Total (n = 738) 433 (59.0) 177 (24.0) 128 (17.0)

_Sample preparation and selective enrichment_



Enrichment cultures for each meat sample were
conducted by combining 25g of each sample with 225
ml of tryptone soya broth (Oxoid Ltd, Basingstoke, UK)
supplemented with 20 mg/l novobiocin (Sigma,
Germany) in a stomacher bag, homogenizing for at least
2 minutes in a stomacher (Lab Blender 400, Seward
Medical, London, UK) and incubating at 37 [o] C for 16 to
18 h.



_J Infect Developing Countries_ 2008; 2(5): 389-393.


_Culture and isolation of E. coli_ O157:H7

All enriched meat samples were subsequently
subcultured onto eosin methylene blue (EMB) agar
(Difco Laboratories, USA) for primary screening of _E._
_coli_ and incubated aerobically at 37 [o] C for 24 hours.
Suspected colonies of _E. coli_ (greenish metallic sheen
appearance with dark purple centers) were
biochemically identified using API 20E gallery
(API20E/20100, bioMerieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France)
and subsequently they were further screened for _E. coli_
O157:H7. In brief, 2-3 biochemically confirmed _E. coli_
were subcultured on Sorbitol MacConkey Agar
(Oxoid), supplemented with 0.05 mg/l cefixime and 2.5
mg/l tellurite (Oxoid) (SMAC-CT) and incubated at
37 [o] C for 18 to 24 hours. Following the end of the
incubation period, the SMAC-CT agar plates were
examined for the presence of non-sorbitol fermenter
colonies and subsequently they were further processed
for serological identification. The type strain _E. coli_
O157:H7 (ATCC 43895) was placed into 10 ml of
Brain Heart Infusion broth (BHI) (Oxoid) and incubated
for 24 hours at 37 [o] C. The resulting culture was streaked
out on SMAC-CT agar and incubated for 24 hours at
37 [o] C. This was used as a positive control.

_Serological identification_

All non-sorbitol fermenting colonies from the
SMAC-CT agar were subjected to slide agglutination
with the _E. coli_ O157 Latex test kit (Oxoid). The latex
beads were coated with antibodies which bind to any
O157 or H7 antigens on the test organisms, forming a
visible antigen antibody precipitate [13]. Colonies
giving a precipitation reaction were confirmed as _E. coli_
O157:H7 positive.

_Antimicrobial susceptibility testing_

The isolated _E. coli_ O157:H7 strains were tested for
antibiotic resistance to thirteen antimicrobial agents
obtained from Oxoid [amikacin (AK) (30 µg),
ampicillin (AMP) (10 µg), cephalothin (KF), (30 µg),
chloramphenicol (C) (30 µg), gentamicin (CN) (10 µg),
kanamycin (K) (30 µg), nalidixic acid (30 µg) (NA),
norfloxacin (NOR) (10 µg), polymyxin B (PB) (300
units), streptomycin (S) (10 µg), trimethoprim (W)
(5µg), trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole (SXT) (25
µg) and tetracycline (TE) (30 µg)] using the disc
diffusion method according to the criteria of the
National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards
(NCCLS) [14]. The isolates were classified as sensitive,
intermediate, and resistant using the breakpoints of the
NCCLS [14]. A standard reference strain of _E. coli_


390




Hiko _et al._ - _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in retail raw meat products of Ethiopia


(ATCC 25922), sensitive to all antimicrobial drugs
being tested, was used as a control strain.

_Statistical analysis_

EPI-INFO Version 6 soft package (CDC, Atlanta
GA) was used for statistical analysis. Comparisons were
made using Chi-square test with Yates’ correction or
Fisher exact tests. A p-value of <0.05 was considered
indicative of a statistically significant difference.

**Results**
_Prevalence of_ E. coli _O157:H7_

Out of 738 meat samples examined, 31 (4.2%) were
found to be contaminated with _E. coli_ O157:H7 (Table
2). Beef was found to be most frequently contaminated
with _E. coli_ O157:H7 (8%) when compared to the other
raw meat types examined (2-2.5%) (p<0.05). The rate
of _E. coli_ O157:H7 isolated from all meat sources was
found to be higher from butcher shops (7.8%) than from
municipality abattoirs (6.8%) and export abattoirs
(2.3%) (p<0.05).

**Table 2.** Prevalence of _Escherichia coli_ O157: H7 isolated
from raw meats samples in Ethiopia.



_J Infect Developing Countries_ 2008; 2(5): 389-393.


animal, and food sources have been reported and nonsorbitol fermenting O157:H7 strains detected in this
study could potentially only represent a fraction of
potential EHEC contamination [15]. In the present
study, beef was more frequently contaminated with _E._
_coli_ O157:H7 compared to other meat samples
examined (Table 2). This percentage is high in
comparison with the prevalence of 0-5% reported
elsewhere in the world [16-19]. However, there are
reports from different parts of the world that show a
high contamination rate of beef with _E. coli_ O157:H7,
_e.g._ 14.7%-22.5% in Peru [20], 31% in Canada [21] and
90% in the USA [22].

**Table 3.** Antimicrobial susceptibility profile of _Escherichia_
_coli_ O157:H7isolated from raw meat samples.


**Source**


**Goat meat (n=5)** **Mutton and/or lamb (n=6)**



S*
No.
(%)



I*
No.
(%)



R*
No.
(%)



S*
No.
(%)



I*
No.
(%)



**Prevalence rates (%) according to the Sources**
**Meat type** **Export** **Municipality** **Butcher**

**Total**

**investigated** **Abattoir** **Abattoir** **shops**



**Export**
**Abattoir**



**Municipality**
**Abattoir**



**Butcher**
**Total**
**shops**



Beef 2/40
(5) [a]



Beef 2/40 10/124 8/86 20/250
(5) [a] (8.1) (9.3) (8)

Mutton and/or 4/188 1/35 1/20 6/243
lamb (2.1) (2.8) (5) (2.5)



10/124
(8.1)



8/86
(9.3)

1/20
(5)

1/22
(4.5)



Mutton and/or 4/188 1/35 1/20 6/243
lamb (2.1) (2.8) (5) (2.5)

Goat meat 3/205 1/18 1/22 5/245
(1.5) (5.5) (4.5) (2)



4/188
(2.1)



1/35
(2.8)

1/18
(5.5)



Goat meat 3/205 1/18 1/22 5/245
(1.5) (5.5) (4.5) (2)

**Total** **9/433** **12/177** **10/128** **31/738**
**(2.1)** **(6.8)** **(7.8)** **(4.2)**



**Total** **9/433** **12/177** **10/128** **31/738**
**(2.1)** **(6.8)** **(7.8)** **(4.2)**

Results expressed as the no. of _E. coli_ O157: H7 -positive samples/total no. of meat
samples analyzed; [a] Percentage of positive samples.

_Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns_

The isolated strains were susceptible (100%) to
amikacin, chloramphenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin,
nalidixic acid, norfloxacin, polymyxin B and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Table 3). Multidrug
resistance (MDR) to three or more drugs was detected
in 7/31 (22.6%) strains. Of the 7 MDR strains, 3 were
resistant to three drugs (streptomycin, tetracycline and
ampicillin), 2 were resistant to four drugs
(streptomycin, cepahlothin, tetracycline and ampicillin),
and 2 were resistant to five drugs (streptomycin,
cephlaothin, tetracycline, ampicillin and trimethoprim).

**Discussion**

EHEC strains belonging to serogroup EHEC O157
are most frequently associated with human disease [15].
However, EHEC strains of other serotypes from human,



**12/177**
**(6.8)**



**10/128**
**(7.8)**



**AK** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  - 0 (0)
**AMP** 18 (90)  - 2 (10) 29 (93.5)  - 2 (6.5)
**KF** 15 (75)  - 5 (25) 24 (77.4)  - 7 (22.6)
**C** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  **CN** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  **K** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  **NA** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  **NOR** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  **PB** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  
**S** 10 (50) 2(10) 8 (40) 19 (61.3) 2 (6.5) 10 (32.2)


**SXT** 20 (100)  -  - 31 (100)  -  
**TE** 14 (70)  - 6 (30) 24 (77.4)  - 7 (22.6)
**W** 17(85)  - 3 (15) 28 (90.3)  - 3 (9.7)
AK: Amikacin; AMP: Ampicillin; KF: Cephalothin; C: Chloramphenicol;
CN:Gentamycin; K: Kanamycin; NA: Nalidixic acid; NOR: Norfloxacin; PB:
Polymyxin B; S: Streptomycin; SXT: Trimethoprim Sulphamethoxazole; TE:
Tetracycline; W: Trimethoprim; S* = Sensitive; I* = Intermediate; R* = Resistant.


391



S* I* R* S* I* R*
No. No. No. No. No. No.
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%)

**AK** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - 0 (0)
**AMP** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - 0 (0)
**KF** 4 (80) - 1 (20) 5 (83.3) - 1 (16.7)
**C** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - **CN** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - **K** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - **NA** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - **NOR** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - **PB** 5 (100) - 0 (0) 6 (100) - 

**S** 4 (80) - 1 (20) 5 (83.3) - 1 (16.7)


**SXT** 5 (100) - - 6 (100) - 
**TE** 5 (100) - - 5 (83.3) - 1(16.7)
**W** 5 (100) - - 6 (100) - 0 (0)


**Source**



**Beef (n=20)** **Total (n =31)**



S*
No.
(%)



I*
No.
(%)



R*
No.
(%)



S*
No.
(%)



I*
No.
(%)



R*
No.
(%)




Hiko _et al._ - _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in retail raw meat products of Ethiopia


_E._ _coli_ O157:H7 was recovered at lower prevalence
in meat samples obtained from sheep (2.5%) and goat
(2%) than beef in the present study. This finding is in
close agreement with the reported prevalence of 2.9% in
the United Kingdom [17] and 2% in Canada [21]. This
might be due to low fecal prevalence of _E coli_ O157:H7
in these animals, which results in relatively low risk of
contamination. The overall variations in the prevalence
of _E. coli_ O157:H7 may be a result of different
sampling techniques employed and laboratory
methodologies used, and may also be due to the reason
that the studies were conducted in different countries at
different times. Since virulence gene detection was not
performed, the data derived in this study should only be
considered presumptive; however, the high prevalence
of O157:H7 strains identified with the limited available
methodology gives cause for concern.

The _E. coli_ O157:H7 strains isolated in this study
were all found susceptible to most antibiotics tested.
Similar findings have been reported by other
researchers [16,23]. However, resistant strains do exist
mainly to ampicillin, tetracycline, streptomycin,
cephalothin and sulphamethoxazole [6,18,23,24] and
were detected in the present study. Multidrug resistance
was found in 22.6% of the strains. Similar findings have
been observed in other studies [6,7].

Although other enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ (EHEC)
serotypes and the virulence factors of _E. coli_ O157:H7
were not investigated because of laboratory facility
limitations, this study revealed that various retail raw
meats products from foods of animal origin are often
contaminated with _E. coli_ O157:H7, suggesting possible
risks of infection to people through consumption of
raw/undercooked meat or cross-contamination of other
foods.

The available evidence also shows that meats from
foods of animal origin serve as potential vehicles for
transmitting _E._ _coli_ O157:H7; interruption of
transmission to humans should be given a high priority.
The importance of proper handling and cooking of
foods of animal origin are probably as important in
preventing _E. coli_ O157:H7 infections as they are in
preventing _Salmonella_ and _Campylobacter_ infections.

Coordinated actions are needed to reduce or
eliminate the risks posed by this organism at various
stages in the food chain. These include Good
Agricultural practice (GAP), Good Manufacturing
practice (GMP), and Hazard Analysis of Critical
Control Points (HACCP) at every stage of the meat
supply chain, from the farm through to the abattoir, to
the retailer, and to those involved with the handling and



_J Infect Developing Countries_ 2008; 2(5): 389-393.


processing of such raw meat products in the home
environment. Antibiotic resistance in most strains in
this study is low. However, MDR organisms may
become a public health risk should they enter the food
chain.

**Acknowledgements**
We would like to thank the owners of abattoirs and butcher shops at
Debre-Zeit and Modjo towns for co-operation in all aspects of our
study. We would like also to extend our heartfelt thanks to Dr.
Rosemarie Blatz from Leipzig University, Germany, for providing
us SMAC-CT agar.

**References**
1. Tarr PI (1995) _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7: clinical, diagnostic
and epidemiological aspects of human infection. Clin Infect Dis
20: 1–10.
2. Uhitil S, Jaksic S, Petrak T, Botka-Petrak K (2004) Presence of
_Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in ground beef and ground baby beef
meat. J Food Prot 64: 862–864.
3. Bielaszewska M, Janda J, Blahova K, Minarıkova H, Jıkova E,
Karmali MA, Laubova J, Sikulova J, Preston MA, Khakhria R,
Karch H, Klazarova H, Nyc O (1997) Human _Escherichia coli_
O157:H7 infection associated with the consumption of
unpasteurized goat’s milk. Epidemiol Infect 119: 299– 305.
4. McDonnell RJ, Rampling A, Crook S, Cockcroft PM,
Willshaw GA, Cheasty T, Stuart J (1997) An outbreak of Vero
cytotoxin producing _Escherichia coli_ O157 infection associated
with takeaway sandwiches. CDR Wkly 7: R201–R205.
5. Zhang, X, McDaniel AD, Wolf LE, Keusch GT, Waldor MK,
Acheson DW (2000) Quinolone antibiotics induce Shiga toxinencoding bacteriophages, toxin production, and death in mice. J
Infect Dis 181: 664-670.
6. Meng J, Zhao S, Doyle MP, Joseph SW (1998) Antibiotic
resistance of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 and O157: NM isolated
from animals, food, and humans. J Food Prot 61: 1511-1514.
7. Mora A, Blanco JE, Blanco M, Alonso MP, Dhabi G, Echeita
A, González EA, Bernárdez MI, Blanco J (2005) Antimicrobial
resistance of Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing _Escherichia_
_coli_ O157:H7 and non-O157 strains isolated from humans,
cattle, sheep and food in Spain. Res Microbiol 156: 793-806.
8. Walsh C, Duffy G, O'Mahony R, Fanning S, Blair IS,
McDowell DA (2006) Antimicrobial resistance in Irish isolates
of verocytotoxigenic _Escherichia coli_ ( _E. coli_ )-VTEC. Int J
Food Microbiol 109:173-8.
9. Riley LW, Remis RS, Helgerson SD, McGee HB, Wells JG,
Davis BR, Hebert RJ, Olcott ES, Johnson LM, Hargrett NT,
Blake PA, Cohen ML (1983) Hemorrhagic colitis associated
with a rare _Escherichia coli_ serotype. N Eng J Med 308: 681–
685.
10. Tamura K, Sakazaki R, Murase M, Kosako Y (1996)

Serotyping and categorization of _Escherichia coli_ strains
isolated between 1958 and 1992 from diarrhoeal diseases in
Asia. J Med Microbiol 45: 353– 358.
11. Raji MA, Minga U, Machangu R (2006) Current
epidemiological status of enterohaemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_
O157:H7 in Africa. Chin Med J (English) 119: 217-222.
12. Tsegaye M, Ashenafi M. (2005) Fate of _Escherichia coli_

O157:H7 during the processing and storage of Ergo and
Ayib, traditional Ethiopian dairy products. Int J Food Microbiol
103:11-21.


392




Hiko _et al._ - _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in retail raw meat products of Ethiopia


13. De Boer E, Heuvelink AE (2000) Methods for the detection

and isolation of Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli._ J Appl
Microbiol Symp Suppl. 88: 1335–1435.
14. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (2000)

Performance standards for antimicrobial disk susceptibility
tests. In: Approved Standard M2-A7, seventh ed. National
Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, Wayne, PA.
15. Chapman PA (1994) Isolation, identification and typing of

verotoxin producing _Escherichia_ _coli_ O157. PHLS
Microbiol Digest 11: 13-27.
16. Dontorou C, Papadopoulou C, Filioussis G, Economou V,

Apostolou I, Zakkas G, Salamoura A, Kansouzidou A,
Levidiotou S (2003) Isolation of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7
from foods in Greece. Int J Food Microbiol 82: 273-279.
17. Chapman PA, Siddons CA, Cerdan Malo AT, Harkin MA

(2000) A one year study of _Escherichia coli_ O157 in raw beef
and lamb products. Epidemiol Infect 124: 207– 213.
18. Magwira CA, Gashe BA, Collison EK (2005) Prevalence and

antibiotic resistance profiles of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 in
beef products from retail outlets in Gaborone, Botswana. J
Food Prot 68: 403-406.
19. Mayrhofer S, Paulsen P, Smulders FJM, Hilbert H (2004)

Antimicrobial resistance profile of five major food-borne
pathogens isolated from beef, pork and poultry. Int J Food
Microbiol 97: 23-29.
20. Mora A, León SL, Blanco M, Blanco JE, Lópe, C, Dahbi G,

Echeita A, González EA, Blanco J (2007) Phage types,
virulence genes and PFGE profiles of Shiga toxin-producing
_Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 isolated from raw beef, soft cheese
and vegetables in Lima (Peru). Int J Food Microbiol 114: 204210.
21. Doyle MP, Schoeni JL (1987) Isolation of _Escherichia coli_

O157:H7 from retail fresh meats and poultry. Appl Environ
Microbiolol 53:2394– 2396.
22. Hoyle B (2000) Renewed concerns over _Escherichia coli_

O157:H7 in ground beef. ASM News 66:331– 332.
23. Reyes MS, Durán CT, Prado VJ (2004) Antimicrobial

susceptibility of shiga toxin producing _Escherichia coli_ (STEC)
strains isolated from human infections and food. Rev Med Chil
132: 1211-1216.
24. Schroeder CM, Zhao C, Deb Roy C, Torcolini J, Zhao S, White

DG, Wagner DD, McDermott PF, Walker RD, Meng J (2002)
Antimicrobial resistance of _Escherichia coli_ O157 isolated
from humans, cattle, swine, and food. Appl Environ Microbiol
68: 576-581.



_J Infect Developing Countries_ 2008; 2(5): 389-393.


**Corresponding Author** : Daniel Asrat, Department of
Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology,
Faculty of Medicine, Addis Ababa University, P.O.Box 9086,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
E-mail: asratdaniel@ethionet.et

**Conflict of interest** **:** No conflict of interest is declared.


393


