suggesting the efficacy of old antimicrobials for treatment of typhoid fever.

The overall prevalence rate (11%) of Salmonella spp. from chicken fecal samples is high and with prevalence rates of 26% and 15% in farms J and K, respectively. Similarly, high prevalence rates have also been reported from Maiduguri, northern Nigeria [20], and a high rate (37%) of Salmonella contamination of broiler farms has been reported from Algeria [61]. Chicken is also a predominant source of Salmonella in Europe and has warranted initiation of targeted control measures [46,62], thus suggesting chickens as important reservoirs of Salmonella in Nigeria. The cause of the high prevalence rate in farms J and K is unknown due to limited data.

In this study, the predominant serovar in chicken was S. Virchow, which is one of the most common serovars in chicken  $ [46,61,63-67] $ . In Europe, S. Virchow was listed as the seventh most common serovar isolated from broiler meat in 2007  $ [46] $ . S. Virchow was observed in all farms expect G, with a high prevalence of 24% and 13% in farms J and K. Interestingly, S. Enteritidis was not isolated from chicken in this study. In contrast, S. Enteritidis is the most predominant serovar in Gallus Gallus flocks in the European Union, with a prevalence of 38%  $ [46] $ . This difference may be explained by differences in export patterns, production systems, climate, or feed. Recently, S. Hiduddify, a rare serovar, was found to be the predominant serovar in chickens in Maiduguri, Northern Nigeria  $ [20] $ , but was also not isolated in the fecal samples of chickens in this study. Northern Nigeria is generally warmer than the region of this study; moreover, the chickens studied by Raufu et al. were largely free range in contrast to the intensively reared chickens we studied, which this may suggest the presence of S. Hiduddify in the environment where chickens likely pick up the serovar from foodstuffs as they scavenge for foods in the environment. This hypothesis needs to be confirmed in free-range chickens in the south or by investigation of the environment in Maiduguri, Nigeria. We also isolated S. Onireke, a rare serovar in chickens from Ibadan, Nigeria. We speculate that those rare isolates found in chicken also originate from reptiles or the environment like the rare serovars obtained from invasive Salmonella in humans, but further research is needed to explore this hypothesis.

Although none of the serovars obtained from chicken fecal samples was isolated from the analysed human blood samples, those serovars still constitute potential serious health risks for humans in Ibadan, Nigeria. In Europe, S. Virchow and S. Derby are among the ten most frequent serovars causing human salmonellosis  $ [46] $  and may be found in human stool samples from Ibadan, Nigeria, if investigated. A plausible explanation for why we could not link any of the serovars obtained from chickens to humans may be due to the analysis of human blood and chicken fecal samples in different years, suggesting time-based shifts in the prevalence of serovars. Analysis of blood samples from only humans could also be responsible because all serovars of NTS are not equally invasive.



The Salmonella isolates from chickens were more commonly resistant to tetracycline, sulfamethoxazole, nalidixic acid, and trimethoprim; this resistance may be attributed to indiscriminate use of antibiotics at recommended doses or at subtherapeutic doses as feed additives to promote growth, and as chemotherapeutic agents to control epizootics on the farms  $ [68] $ . The high level of resistance to nalidixic acid coupled with the high level of reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin is worrisome because fluoroquinolones are strategic in the treatment of invasive salmonellosis  $ [60] $ . The most resistant serovar from chicken was S. Virchow; this serovar is usually multiple resistant to antimicrobials  $ [64,65,69] $ . These observations call for regulation of antibiotic usage in Nigeria to stem the spread of resistance to antimicrobials. The finding of qnrS1 in S. Derby is another public concern because qnr genes mediate resistance to fluoroquinolones, which can compromise treatment with fluoroquinolones  $ [60] $ ; furthermore, qnr location on mobile genetic elements coupled with indiscriminate use of antibiotics in Nigeria will facilitate selection and potential spread to other serovars  $ [70] $ .

## Conclusion

This study reports the relative importance of S. Enteritidis, S. Typhimurium, and S. Dublin associated with human bacteraemia in Ibadan, Nigeria, and that S. Typhi still constitutes a significant public health risk. This is the first time that S. Dublin has been reported as an important cause of invasive salmonellosis in sub-Saharan African countries. We also observed rarely isolated Salmonella serovars previously associated with reptiles causing invasive salmonellosis in humans.

As observed elsewhere in Nigeria, we can confirm the high prevalence rates of Salmonella spp. from chicken fecal samples, with S. Virchow as the