Antimicrobial resistance rates of thermotolerant Campylobacter isolated strains.



<table><tr><td></td><td>Profil</td><td>AM</td><td>AMC</td><td>GM</td><td>E</td><td>C</td><td>TE</td><td>NA</td><td>CIP</td></tr><tr><td>Resistant strains from</td><td>No.</td><td>62</td><td>42</td><td>0</td><td>24</td><td>0</td><td>72</td><td>85</td><td>77</td></tr><tr><td>Droppings</td><td>(%)</td><td>(72.9)</td><td>(49.4)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(28.2)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(84.7)</td><td>(100)</td><td>(90.6)</td></tr><tr><td>Resistant strains from</td><td>No.</td><td>73</td><td>42</td><td>0</td><td>18</td><td>0</td><td>79</td><td>98</td><td>78</td></tr><tr><td>Caecal contents</td><td>(%)</td><td>(74.5)</td><td>(42.9)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(18.4)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(80.6)</td><td>(100)</td><td>(79.6)</td></tr><tr><td>Resistant strains from</td><td>No.</td><td>63</td><td>39</td><td>0</td><td>15</td><td>0</td><td>69</td><td>80</td><td>65</td></tr><tr><td>Neck skins</td><td>(%)</td><td>(78.8)</td><td>(48.8)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(18.8)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(86.3)</td><td>(100)</td><td>(81.3)</td></tr><tr><td>Resistant strains</td><td>No.</td><td>198</td><td>123</td><td>0</td><td>57</td><td>0</td><td>220</td><td>263</td><td>220</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>(%)</td><td>(75.3)</td><td>(46.8)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(21.7)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(83.7)</td><td>(100)</td><td>(83.7)</td></tr><tr><td>P-Value</td><td></td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td><td>P &gt; 0.05</td></tr></table>

Abbreviations: No, Number; AM, ampicillin; AMC, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid; GM, gentamicin; E, erythromycin; C, chloramphenicol; TE, tetracycline; NA, nalidixic acid; CIP, ciprofloxacin.

P-Value: Value for the antimicrobial resistance difference between the strains isolated from feces, caecal content and those isolated from neck skin samples to the same antibiotic.

(2010b), and the environmental stresses encountered by bacteria during the slaughter process (McMahon, Xu, Moore, Blair, & McDowell, 2007) may also play a role in the phenomenon of antibiotic resistance.

21.7% of isolated strains were resistant to erythromycin, this resistance remains low in industrialized countries, however, resistant strains are frequently observed in developing countries, including Thailand (50%) and Zimbabwe (14%) (WHO, 2003). In another way, Lin et al. (2007) showed that erythromycin used in low doses over a long period (which corresponds to their use as a growth factor) selects for resistant strains of Campylobacter.

83.7% of isolated strains were resistant to ciprofloxacin. Several studies have demonstrated the rapid development of mutants resistant to fluoroquinolones in chickens infected with initially fluoroquinolones susceptible Campylobacter, and treated with enrofloxacin. Indeed, treatments of chickens do not eradicate the organism but convert initially susceptible population to resistant fluoroquinolones population which emerges as soon as 24 h from start of treatment (Farnell et al., 2005; Han, Sahin, Barton, & Zhang, 2008; McDermott, Bodeis, & English, 2002; ).

The resistance to tetracycline was very frequent (83.7%) as reported by other authors (Bester & Essack, 2008; Mansouri-najand, Saleha, & Wai, 2012; Tambur, Miljkovic-Selimovic, Doder, & Kulisic, 2010).

Resistance pattern profiles of isolated thermotolerants Campylobacter strains.



<table><tr><td>Associated resistances to</td><td>Resistance pattern profiles</td><td>No. of strains</td><td>No. total (%)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Two antibiotics</td><td>NA,CIP</td><td>7</td><td>15 (5.7)</td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM</td><td>2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,TE</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Three antibiotics</td><td>NA,CIP,AM</td><td>18</td><td>72 (27.4)</td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,E</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,TE</td><td>32</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM,AMC</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM,TE</td><td>2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,TE,E</td><td>10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Four antibiotics</td><td>NA,CIP,AM,AMC</td><td>9</td><td>65 (24.7)</td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,AM,TE</td><td>41</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,AMC,TE</td><td>1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,TE,E</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM,AMC,TE</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM,TE,E</td><td>2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Five antibiotics</td><td>NA,CIP,AM,AMC,TE</td><td>74</td><td>97 (36.9)</td></tr><tr><td>NA,CIP,AM,TE,E</td><td>14</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA,AM,AMC,TE,E</td><td>9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Six antibiotics</td><td>NA,CIP,AM,AMC,TE,E</td><td>14</td><td>14 (5.3)</td></tr></table>

Abbreviations: No, Number; AM, ampicillin; AMC, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid; GM, gentamicin; E, erythromycin; C, chloramphenicol; TE, tetracycline; NA, nalidixic acid; CIP, ciprofloxacin.

In Malaysia, resistance rates were higher than our results; 86% was recorded to ampicillin, 82% to ciprofloxacin, 92% to tetracycline and 99% to erythromycin and even with gentamicin (35%) (Tang, Mohamad Ghazali, Saleha, Nishibuchi, & Son, 2009).

Roughly, Vandeplas et al. (2008) believe that changes in rates of antimicrobial resistance between countries reflect various veterinary practices in antimicrobial use for treatment and prevention.

All our isolates were multi-drug resistant; we had identified a dominant profile combining resistance to two beta-lactams, two quinolones and tetracycline. In Belgium, the National Reference Laboratory for foodborne disease and antimicrobial resistance of zoonotic agents, announced that the percentages of strains multi-drug resistant of C. jejuni and C. coli isolated from chickens were 40% and 64% respectively, the dominant profile was "nalidixic acid, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline" (Dierick, Botteldoorn, Denayer, & Naranjo, 2009).

15% of strains isolated in our study were resistant to both ciprofloxacin and erythromycin. These strains represent a critical profiles, since these two antibiotics are the mostly used in Campylobacter infections in humans (Engberg, Aarestrup, Gerner-Smidt, & Nachamkin, 2001; Luangtongkum et al., 2009). In addition to clinical troubles, transmission of multi-resistant Campylobacter to humans through food chain can also compromise the effectiveness of treatment. Indeed, the EFSA has published a report indicating that antimicrobial resistance phenomenon occurs in most common zoonosis bacteria, particularly Campylobacter from animals and food in the European Union (EFSA, 2010b).

### 5. Conclusion

Unlike other foodborne pathogens, Campylobacter are very susceptible to many environmental conditions, as concluded in this survey, our results confirm that Campylobacter can survive well from poultry farms to the plate of consumer and are of concern to food poisoning. Indeed, intestinal carriage and neck skins contamination rates in the present study showed high survival of Campylobacter in farms, in slaughterhouses and carcasses. It revealed that antibiotic resistant Campylobacter is common among chickens which can find their way into the food chain. The recorded multi-drug resistant campylobacters which was also reported to be common in other countries reflect an alarming situation with regard to this phenomenon which may be due to the widespread use of antibiotics in poultry farming. As major source of human campylobacteriosis, prevention should be focused on reducing Campylobacter infection at all stages of poultry production chain, as well as for the controlling use of antimicrobials in veterinary medicine in Algeria. Thus, there is an urgent need for prudent use of antibiotics in poultry production to reduce the development and spread of multi-drug resistant Campylobacter which must be diligently monitored. Our results also emphasize the