## I NTRODUCTION

In Egypt, since more than three millennia dating from the Eighteenth Dynasty chronology, the domestic cattle are incorporated with all types of agricultural activities in addition to their provision of meat, internal organs (heart, kidneys, pancreas, rumen, intestine), milk, cheese, ghee, skin, bone, manure, horns, and tendons (Conférence publique de Mlle M-Christine Lavier Toulon, 2000; Benderitter, 2003).

Antimicrobial agents are widely spread and intensively used in the food production systems (FAO, 2015). The aftermath of this operation varies considerably globally as a result of the interaction between human (social structure) and animal demography (species, distribution, and density), farming systems, contaminated water sources, socio-economic strategies (manufacturing, commerce, availability of food, and animal fitness), and nation and world-wide trade. Although antibiotic use in food animals has been concealed from the public scene yet, antibiotic application in meat producing animals have impacted on public health and has left no room for confusion after being scientifically documented (Conniff, 2015). In 2010, an announcement having a public consequential impact was made public by the FDA to the world in that 28.7 million pounds of antibiotics, which comprises 80% of the total amount of antibiotics utilized in the USA, were being poured down in the animal production industry not to medical care and that currently, two million people are annually sickened by resistant bacterial infections and that 23,000 die annually according to the CDC (Conniff, 2015).

Eventually, besides tracing the use of antibiotics, the effectual monitoring of antimicrobial resistance is the linchpin of any national and international successful achievement in their control policy. The pivotal role of monitoring was highlighted in the 2001 WHO Global Strategy for Containment of antimicrobial resistance and on the occasion of World Health Day 2011, wherein resistance, antimicrobial consumption, and disease stress are included as prime listings. The facts and statistics collected can be used to implement the government's rationale for introducing such radical legislation in the perfection of antibiotic use, to propose strategy and discern the prime concern for employment to provide public support regionally and globally.

Staphylococcus aureus is a hazard because of its detrimental effects on animal health and its capacity for transmission from animals to humans and vice-versa (Peton and Le Loir, 2014). The isolation universality of multidrug-resistant staphylococci from meat samples has been perceived by several researchers (Santos-Sanches et al., 2000; Khan et al., 2005; Huber et al., 2011; Bhargava and Zhang, 2014; Chajekca-Wierzchowska et al., 2015; Guran and Kahya, 2015). This should be taken seriously, especially when the finding of Waters et al. (2011) documents that, close to 50 percent of meat samples tested from U.S. grocery stores are contaminated with the bacteria S. aureus and resistant to at least three classes of antibiotics. Methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus (MRSA), which is linked to a wide range of human diseases (Köck et al., 2010; Fätkenheuer and Kaasch, 2014; Yaw et al., 2014), is notorious for its related-Nous to food contamination and its potentiality for its transmission to humans prevails. The pre-eminent disquiet in the European Union, has become the prevention and control of MRSA being ascertained as the most public health problem (Köck et al., 2010), an act that should be implemented in Egypt. Also, the high prevalence of MR-CNS found in livestock production (Huber et al., 2011) becomes a relevant consternation in view of the dispersing potentiality of mecA to MRSA as several coagulase negative staphylococcus (CNS) species, which are also non-S. aureus (NSA), can serve as reservoirs for mecA (Bhargava and Zhang, 2014). This consigned multiresistant CNS-NSA strains the intuitive capability to develop into an emerging problem for veterinary medicine.



Although CNS have emerged as important pathogens, little is known about the virulence factors of these bacteria (Stepanovic et al., 2001). The most important virulence factor of CNS is assumed to be the capacity for biofilm formation and, that testing for biofilm production could be a useful marker for the pathogenicity of CNS (Stepanovic et al., 2001).

In general, we have not come across any investigations involving biofilm formation, and the antibiotic resistant genes mecA, cfr, gyrA, gyrB, and grlA in MRSA in beef meat and in methicillin-resistant non-S. aureus (MR-NSA). Thereby, we aimed an endeavor to identify one of the main hazardous threat to public health, Staphylococcus species, to determine the generality of contamination of beef meat as a measurement for the exposure of consumers to MRSA and MR-NSA in retail beef meat in the Egyptian market, the rate of biofilm producers among the tested S. aureus comparable to non-S. aureus strains, their carriage to the antibiotic resistant genes mecA, cfr, gyrA, gyrB, and grlA and their consequence as a public health hazard.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Sample Collection

During the year 2013, 100 samples of retail whole beef were collected from several butchers and marts in the Great Cairo zone. Each sample weighing at least 500 g was aseptically collected with the minimum of cross-contamination and immediately conveyed to the laboratory to be microbiologically examined.

## I solation and Identification

To 50 g of meat samples, 100 ml of phosphate-buffered saline was added all in a sterile plastic bag which were vigorously shaken for 2 min to remove bacteria. Then 1 ml of each rinsate was used for isolation and detection of Staphylococcus isolates by the Double Enrichment method. The isolates were used for further culture to be consequently biochemically characterized as S. aureus (n = nine) and non-S. aureus (n = 18) according to Thorberg and Brandstrom (2000). A sub-culture of the 27 isolates were stored at  $ -27^{\circ} $ C in tryptic soy broth and fetal calf serum [Gibco/Invitrogen Carlsbad (CA) USA] containing 2% yeast extract (v/v) to be revitalized for phenotypic virulence assay, phenotypic antimicrobial resistance profile and molecular characterization.